				    MODEL  QUESTION  PAPER  5

TIME : 2 HOUR 30 MINUTES							FULL MARKS : 70

				      Section A - Reading (10 marks)

1. Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow:				(10)

High-altitude climbing is still a very dangerous task in spite of the availability of oxygen masks and other protective equipment, which modern climbers take along with them. These, of course, are indispensable accessories of climbing,
but more important than these is the stamina of the climber, which ultimately determines the success of his attempt to climb. Throughout his journey, death is his constant companion, which he can keep at a distance only with his superb presence of mind. He has to tread every inch of the ground with utmost care, for a false step may not only strike him a fatal blow, but also bring disaster to the whole expedition. That is why, all expeditions invariably take with them local guides who are experienced climbers and who have a thorough knowledge of the nature of the terrain. A huge amount of capital is needed for financing such expeditions and this is generally provided by government or rich private organisations.

The primary objective of a mountaineering expedition is to get to the top of a high mountain, which in the past has withstood all attempts to conquer it. But if an expedition does not reach its destination it should not be presumed that
the expedition is a complete failure. Sometimes, operations are temporarily suspended because of bad weather, loss of some valuable equipment or sudden death of a member of the party. Every big expedition indudes men who are interested in botany, biology, geology, and various other branches of science, and these men carry with them equipment for recording their observations related to the weather, the terrain, and the different forms of life in the higher altitudes. 'Other scientists, explorers, and expeditioners utilise the fruits of the earlier expeditioners' observations. Thus, every unsuccessful expedition contributes to the success of later expeditions. The British expedition led by Colonel Hunt would have found the way to Everest much more difficult had not earlier expeditions armed them with useful knowledge about the death-dealing weather which they had to encounter in the vicinity of the summit.

On the basis of your reading of the passage answer the following questions:				(10*1=10)

(i) What determined the success of the climbers?
a) Every earlier unsuccessful expedition.
b) The experience of locals.
c) Rich private organisations.
d) The experience of ordinary people.

(ii) What accessories does a climber have to be equipped with?
a) Oxygen masks.
b) The observation of the locals.
c) Knee pads and a parachute.
d) Oxygen masks and other protective equipment.

(iii) Throughout the journey, the constant companion of a mountaineer is ______.
a) the oxygen mask
b) death
c) the local guides
d) protective equipment

(iv) The primary objective of a mountaineering expedition is to ______.
a) get to the top of a high mountain.
b) get a thorough knowledge of the nature of the terrain.
c) contribute to the success of later expeditions.
d) feast the eyes on the distant landscape.

(v) Sometimes, operations are temporarily suspended because of
a) bad weather
b) sudden death
c) bad weather, sudden death & loss of valuable equipment
d) loss of valuable equipment

(vi) The British expedition was led by ______.
a) General Dwyer
b) Colonel Hunt
c) local mountaineers
d) a group of scientists

(vii) The terrain climbers should tread every inch of their climb ______.
a) with tank full of oxygen
b) with a bag full of snacks
c) with a strong rope
d) with utmost care

(viii) A small amount of capital is not required for Bnancing high-altitude climbing expeditions.
a) TRUE
b) FALSE

(ix) High altitude climbing is a very easy task.
a) FALSE
b) TRUE

(x) If an expedition does not reach its destination, it should not be presumed that the expedition is a total failure.
a) TRUE
b) FALSE

			        	Section B - Writing & Grammar – (20 Marks)

2. The given pie chart represents the amount of money spent by a family on different items in a month. Write an analytical paragraph using the information given in the chart.						(5)

3. You are Aradhya/Adarsh, a resident of Lucknow. You are a subscriber of a weekly magazine named Outlook. Lately you have not been receiving the copies of the magazine on a regular basis. Write a letter to the Sales Manager, Outlook enquiring about the non-receipt of copies. (100-120 words)					(5)

4. The following paragraph has not been edited. There is one error in each line. Identify the error and write its correction against the correct blank space. Remember to underline the correction. The first one has been done for you.	(5)

								Error		Correction
A little boy wanted to meeting God				(a)	meeting		meet
He knew that it will be a long trip 				(b)		
So he packed his suitcase by a big piece 				(c)		
of cake and several cans of milk. He than 				(d)		
started off his journey. On the way, he met				(e)		
an elder woman. She was sitting on a bench. 			(f)

5. Look at the words and phrases below. Rearrange them to form meaningful sentences to complete the dialogue which follows. Write each sentence in the space provided.						(5)

(a) greatest mysteries / birdlife / migration / one of the / of / is
(b) ringing / of the /on migration /most / has come / from / information / young and adult birds
(c) stamped with / a light aluminium ring / a number and return address / is fastened I before it / leaves the nest / to the bird
(d) a special register / released / a detailed record / and / is kept in / is / the bird / then
(e) extensively employed / the method / of / has been / ringing birds / factual data t in recent years / in ., Europe and America / for collecting


				Section C - Literature Textbook (40 marks)


6. Read the extract and answer the following questions by choosing the correct option:			(5+5=10)

A. “Our elders are often heard reminiscing nostalgically about those good old Portuguese days, the Portuguese and their famous loaves of bread. Those eaters might have vanished but the makers are still there. We still have amongst us the mixers, the moulders and those who bake the loaves. Those age-old, time-tested furnaces still exist. The fire in these furnaces has not yet been extinguished. The thud and jingle of traditional baker’s bamboo, heralding his arrival in the
morning, can still be heard in some places. ”

(i) The narrator says that the furnaces were ‘time-tested’ because
a) they had been thoroughly tested each time, before being used.
b) they had proved the test of time and were working well.
c) they had been tested by modern day experts.
d) they had the power to withstand inexperienced usage.

(ii) Those eaters might have vanished but the makers are still there. Pick the option that expresses the tone of the narrator.
1) elated
2) morose
3) nostalgic
4) hopeful
5) sarcastic
6) critical
7) celebratory
a) 1 and 7
b) 2 and 6
c) 3 and 4
d) 4 and 5

(iii) Pick the idiom that brings out the same meaning of ‘reminiscing’ as used in the passage
a) train of thought.
b) commit something to memory.
c) a trip down memory lane.
d) jog somebody’s memory.

(iv) Why do you think the baker came in with ‘a thud and a jingle’?
a) He wanted to make everyone alert and active with his presence.
b) He wanted to wake up everyone from their slumber and ask them to  visit the bakery.
c) He was used to making a loud noise as most people responded to just that.
d) He wanted to make people aware that he had come around to sell his goodies.

(v) The ‘fire in the furnaces has not yet been extinguished’ implies that
a) the furnaces are still being used to bake the loaves of bread.
b) The fire is in the process of being reviewed as a replaceable method for heating furnaces.
c) The furnaces are very strong and cannot be shifted for use in other areas.
d) The fire in the furnaces takes a long time to cease burning, once lighted.

B. "What is the boy now, who has lost his ball,
     What, what is he to do? I saw it go
     Merrily bouncing, down the street, and then
     Merrily over- there it is in the water!"

(i) The extract suggests that the poet is
a) an onlooker observing
b) a parent recounting the incident
c) the boy talking about himself
d) imagining the incident

(ii) The poet seems to have indicated the merry bouncing of the ball to
a) create a sense of rhythm in these lines.
b) support the happiness of the experience of playing.
c) contrast with the dejected feeling of the boy.
d)indicate the cheerful mood of the boy.

(iii) Choose the situation that corresponds to the emotion behind the exclamation mark in the poem.

	(1)
Hey! Hey! That's is no
way to dispose off
the garbage. Have
you no community
sense? Please but it
in the bin.
	(2)
I knew it! I knew
he'll fare well in his
auditions for
'Young Chef'. Now
we prepare for the
semi-finals.
	(3)
I don't know where
I've placed my ID-
card. Let me check
the bag once
more. Ah, finally!
	(4)
I've been trying to call
mom for the past 20
minutes and can't get
through. I don't know
how...Aarrgh! Again!
a) option 1
b) option 2
c) option 3
d) option 4

(iv) The poem begins with a question. Based on your reading of the poem, the speaker
a) wants the boy to answer the question.
b) expects the passers-by to respond.
c) is looking for answers in a self-help book.
d) is thinking to himself.

(v) Alliteration is a literary device that occurs with the same letter or sound at the beginning of adjacent or closely connected words. Pick the option that showcases an example of alliteration from the extract.
a) What is the boy now
b) who has lost his ball
c) I saw it go
d) and then/ Merrily over

7. Answer the following questions in about 40-50 words each:					(3*4=12)

a) Would you call Amanda a disrespectful child? Provide one reason to justify your opinion.
b) Why does the author in ‘Coorg’ say that the visitors’ search for the heart and soul of India would be found in Coorg?
c) What kind of an image does “languid, emerald sea” evoke?
d) Pranjol buried his head in his detective book while Rajvir was eager to look at the beautiful scenery during the train journey. Why was there a difference in their attitude?

8.  Answer the following questions in about 100-120 words each:					(3*6=18)

a) Imagine	you are Richard. You have been invited by Mr Weiherer to deliver a short address to the students at your erstwhile school. You have been asked to encourage them to take an interest in the study of Science and how research in	
Science can help the world. Write that short speech.

b) After reading the story about Valli; you realise that she had such a small desire and demanded nothing from her mother.
After reflecting on this, you decide to write a diary entry on how you felt you have been unreasonable about the demands you have posed to your parents. You also realise that life is not all about materialistic possessions.
You may begin like this:

15August 2020, Saturday								9:00 pm

I feel I have learnt a big lesson in life after reading about Valli. I feel ashamed for the way I have been …………………….

c) Griffin set the house on fire when he was	thrown out. Anger and revenge are in no way a solution to any problem. You	 are a columnist for a class X e-zine(magazine). Create a column on importance of anger	management for teens	 and its	 detrimental effects on	health.	
You may begin like this:

				ANGER DOESN'T RESOLVE, IT DESTROYS
					        by ______, X __
	
	Griffin, in Footprints Without Feet sets the house on fire ____________ (continue)

