					    A  TRIUMPH  OF  SURGERY


**Short Answer (SA) Questions:

1. "I think I know a cure for you". What was Dr Herriot's 'cure' for Tricki?
Ans: Seeing the miserable condition of Tricki, Dr Herriot at once decides to keep him away from his mistress Mrs Pumphery for a while. So, he suggested that Tricki should be hospitalized for about a fortnight as he had to be kept under observation.

2. Why was Dr Herriot shocked at Tricki's appearance?
Ans: Dr Herriot was shocked at Tricki's appearance because he had become hugely fat. His eyes looked bloodshot and rheumy and his tongue lolled from his jaws. He could walk with difficulty.

3. What was Mrs pumphery's reaction when Dr Herriot suggested Tricki's hospitalization?
Ans: Dr Herriot had made his plan in advance. So when Mrs Pumphrey reported Tricki's illness, he at once suggested him to be hospitalized for about a fortnight to be kept under observation.

4. Which two suggestions did Dr Herriot give to Mrs Pumphrey at the initial stage? Did she follow?
Ans: Dr  Herriot suggested Mrs Pumphrey to cutdown on the sweet things given to Tricki. He asked her to provide more exercise to the dog.

5. What did Mrs Pumphery do to bring him back to normal health? Was she successful?
Ans: When Mrs Pumphrey found Tricki weak, she started giving him extra diet between meals to build him up. She gave him some malt and cod-liver oiland a bowl of Horlicks at night.

6. Why did Mrs Pumphery make a frantic call to Dr Herriot?
Ans: Suddenly Tricki stopped eating. He refused even his favourite dishes and had bouts of vomiting. He spent all the time lying on rug, panting and did not do anything. So Mrs Pumphery was distraught and made a frantic call to Dr Herriot.

7. What step did Dr Herriot take to save Tricki?
Ans: Dr Herriot immediately hospitalised Tricki for about a fortnight as it was necessary to part him from his mistress. Tricki's only problem was overfeeding which he knew. Tricki needed dieting which was possible only in absence of Mrs Pumphery. He stopped giving food to Tricki. He was given only plenty of water.

8. Why was Tricki an uninteresting object for other dogs at the surgery?
Ans: When Tricki was brought to the surgery, all the household dogs surged around him but Tricki looked down at the noisy pack with dull eyes and lay motionless on the carpet. So after sniffing him for a few seconds, they found him an uninteresting object and moved away from him.

9. What evidence do you get from the text about Tricki's affluent living?
Ans: Tricki was loved by his mistress. She was very much concerned for him. She was rather blind in love. Tricki lived a more lavish life than any normal human being. He had a whole wardrobe of clothes for different weather, raincoat for wet days, different bowls for different meals, toys, cushions, comfortable bed, and what not. He was given rich diet including cream cakes and chocolates which he loved.

10. Describe the 'parting scene' between Tricki and Mrs Pumphery;s household.
Ans: The only way to save Tricki was to take him away. When Dr Herriot was about to take him to his surgery for treatment, Mrs Pumphery started wailing. The entire staff was roused and maids rushed in and out bringing his day bed, night bed, favourite cushions, toys and rubber rings and different bowls. As Dr Herriot moved off, Mrs Pumphery, with a despairing cry, threw an armful of the little coats through the window. Everybody was in tears. It was a sad and tearful parting.


**Long Answer (LA) Questions:

1. Write a brief character sketch of Mrs Pumphery.
Ans: Mrs Pumphery was a rich but eccentric lady. She was an ignorant kind of person. She had a pet dog Tricki, whom she loved more than anything. Her way of showing love was very different. She overfed Tricki. She showed her concern by giving him rich and extra diet between meals which finally made Tricki ill. She couldn't bear Tricki doing exercise. She thought that it would made Tricki tired while it was necessary for him. She pampered her pet which had a wardrobe of clothes for every season, raincoat for wet days, different bowls for different meals, toys, cushions, comfortable bed, and what not. He rway of loving was not normal. But she was also a kind-hearted lady who finally burst into tears while parting with her dog. She had all human qualities as she didn't forget to thank Dr Herriot at the end.

2. What evidence do you get of Tricki's affluent living from the text?
Ans: Tricki is thoroughly pampered by his mistress Mrs Pumphery. Dr Herriot is shocked at Tricki's appearance. He has become hugely fat like a bloated sausage. with a leg at each corner. His eyes, bloodshot and rheumy, stares straight ahead his tongue lolls from his jaws.
    Mrs Pumphery explains to Dr Herriot that Tricki must be suffering from malnutrition. So she has been giving him some extras between meals to build him up, some malt and cod-liver oil and a bowl of Horlicks at night to make him sleep. Above all, he gets cream cakes and chocolates. To make the things worst he has been doing no exercise. when Tricki is sent to Vet. hospital, the entire staff of Mrs Pumphery's house rush to bring his day bed, his night bed, favourite cushions, toys, rubber rings, breakfast bowl, lunch bowl, supper bowl. When Dr Herriot informs Mrs Pumphery that the little fellow is convalescing rapidly, she begins to send fresh eggs, and wine to build him up. It all shows that Tricki has an affluent living.

3. Give a brief sketch of Tricki.
Ans: Tricki is thoroughly pampered by his mistress Mrs Pumphery. He has become hugely fat like a bloated sausage with a leg at each corner. His eyes, bloodshot and rheumy, stares straight ahead his tongue lolled from his jaws. He is greedy and never refuses food. His mistress gives him som elittle extras between meals to build him up, some malt and cod-liver oil and a bowl of Horlicks at night to make him sleep. Above all, he gets cream cakes and chocolates. To make the things worst he has been doing no exercise. When Tricki is sent to Vet. hospital, the entire staff of Mrs Pumphery's house rush to bring his day bed, his night bed, favourite cushions, toys, rubber rings, breakfast bowl, lunch bowl, supper bowl. When Dr Herriot informs Mrs Pumphery that the little fellow is convalescing rapidly, she begins to send fresh eggs, and wine to build him up. Tricki has an affluent living.

4. "Over pampering is not only bad for human but also for animals". Explain the statement in the light of the story "A Triumph of Surgery".
						OR
"Kids or cubs need fondling but too much pampering may harm them". How far does it apply in the case of Tricki?
Ans: We all know that children are over-pampered by the parents due to their sentimental attachments to them. In the story "A Triumph of Surgery" a dog Tricki is over-pampered by his wealthy mistress Mrs Pumphery. She believes that her little dog is suffering from malnutrition, so she gives him some little extras between meals to build him up, some malt and cod-liver oil and bowl of Horlicks at night to make him sleep. Above all, he gets cream cakes and chocolates. To make the things worst he has been doing no exercise. When Dr Herriot takes the dog to his Vet. hospital, it seems all the items of Tricki's comfort would be sent with him. Even during his stay at the hospital, Mrs Pumphery tries to provide him all the comforts. But Dr Herriot deals with the situation cleverly and the dog cures rapidly to return back to his mistress.
						OR
Ans: Mrs Pumphery is very fond of her pet, Tricki. She gives him rich diets and even richer caring like having wardrobes full of different weather clothes for him. Tricki has neither fix timings nor control over eating. This makes him greedy and soon ill. His mistress still keep im stuffing despite consistent warnings from the Doctor. Soon Tricki comes to trotting, drooping and panting for breath. Finally he had to be sent to hospital for recovery. Only discipline on eating and fun play cure him.