					            A TIGER IN THE ZOO


**Read the stanza and answer the questions that follows:

1. He talks in his vivid stripes
    The few steps of his cage,
    On pads of velvet quiet,
    In his quiet rage.
(i) Name the poem and poet.
Ans: These lines have been taken from the poem "A Tiger in the Zoo" composed by Leslie Norris.
(ii) Who does 'He' refer to? Where is he kept?
Ans: 'He' refers to the Tiger. He is kept in a cage.
(iii) Where is 'He'? Is he happy there?
Ans: He is in the cage in the zoo. No, the tiger is not happy in the zoo.
(iv) Pick out the word from the extract that means the same as -- 'bright'.
Ans: 'Vivid'.

2. He should be lurking in shadow,
    Sliding through long grass
    Near the water hole
    Where plump deer pass.
(i) Who does 'He' refer to?
Ans: 'He' refers to the tiger.
(ii) Where is the tiger at present?
Ans: Tiger is in its natural habitat at present.
(iii) Give a word opposite in meaning from these lines to 'light'.
Ans: Shadow.
(iv) Pick out the word from the extract that means the same as -- "wait in hiding".
Ans: 'Lurk'.

3. He should be snarling around houses
    At the jungle's edge,
    Baring his white fangs, his claws,
    Terrorising the village!
(i) Who is 'He' in the stanza?
Ans: 'He' in the stanza stands for the tiger.
(ii) Why does he move around the houses?
Ans: He moves around the houses in search of his prey.
(iii) How should he be terrorising the village?
Ans: He should be terrorising the village people with baring of his white fangs and with his claws.
(iv) Give noun form of 'terrorise'.
Ans: Terror.

4. But he's locked in a concrete cell
    His strength behind bars,
    Stalking the length of his cage,
    Ignoring visitors.
(i) Where is he locked?
Ans: He is locked in a concrete cell behind the bars.
(ii) Where is he striding?
Ans: He is striding in his concrete cell.
(iii) Whom does he ignore?
Ans: He ignores the visitors.
(iv) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as -- 'walk stiffy'.
Ans: "Stalk".

5. He hears the last voice at night,
    The patrolling cars,
    And stares with his brilliant eyes
    At the brilliant stars.
(i) Who does 'He' refer to?
Ans: He refers to the tiger.
(ii) What does 'He' do at night?
Ans: The tiger watches the stars at night.
(iii) What are the cars doing?
Ans: The cars are patrolling the area.
(iv) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as -- 'gleaming'.
Ans: 'Brilliant'.


**Long and Short Questions Answers:

1. How does the tiger feel in the zoo?
Ans: The poet describes the feelings of the tiger in the zoo. He keeps on moving fron one corner to another. "He stalks in his vivid stripes moving the few steps of his cage." He is not happy. He expresses his silent anger.

2. How does the tiger walk in the cage?
Ans: IN the cage, the tiger walks stately and furiously.

3. What message do you get from this poem?
Ans: From this poem, we come to know that animals like to live freely in the forest. The animals do not want to live in the zoo. Their lives are pitiable in it.

4. How does the tiger act in the cage?
Ans: The tiger is in the cage. He is powerless and helpless. He longs for freedom. His velvet pads do not make any noise. He is in the silent anger roaring and ignoring the visitors.

5. What would the tiger do in a forest?
Ans: In the forest, the tiger can enjoy complete freedom. He would walk around freely without any fear. He would terrorise the villagers by growling. He would show his teeth and claws.

6. What does the poet want to convey through this poem?
Ans: The poet wants to convey that like human beings, animals also like freedom. They do not want to becaged, they cannot live a miserable life. If their habitat is destroyed by human beings, these animals cannot survive.

7. What would the tiger do in a forest?
Ans: In the forest, the tiger can enjoy complete freedom. He would walk around freely without any fear. He would terrorise the villagers by growling. He would show his teeth and claws.

8. "Freedom is a birth right. It is the most beautiful gift of God. It is valuable for all human beings as well as for creatures," Discuss with reference to the poem "A Tiger in the Zoo".
Ans: Freedom is the most beautiful gift of God. Freedom is a birth right, without freedom all is in vain. Since the man has come on his earth, he tries to enslavethe weaker sections for his own selfishness. If a bird lives in a golden cage, it cannot become happy. It loves to fly freely freely in an open sky. In the same way, if a man lives in a prisonand gets everything, he cannot feel happiness. But if  a man lives freely, he will be happy even in poor conditions.

9. Tigers are becoming extinct due to deforestation and poaching. How can people be sensitized about the need of tiger.
Ans: Tigers are considered as an endangered species. People are killing tigers for their skins, bones, claws and teeth. Due to this, the population of tigers has declined. We should not encroach on their habitat. As we all need sheltered home, tigers also need natural surroundings.
Forests should not be cut down. They (Tigers) must be given more space to move freely around. 