					MODEL  QUESTION  PAPER  2

      TIME: 2 HOURS									TOTAL MARKS: 50


1. Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow:						(10)

	Happiness is like the sun, it is often hidden by the clouds of thoughts, worries and desires. We have to scatters and dissolve them to experience happiness. You don't have to create happiness. All you have to do is calm you mind, because when there is a quiet mind and inner peace, there is happiness. Happiness is not something far away and unattainable. Happiness does not depend on circumstances or objects. It is an inseparable part of our consciousness, of our essence, but hidden and covered from sight by our thoughts, desires and worries. The mind is always in a constant race from one thought to another, from one worry to another. It constantly move from one object or task to another, never standing still. This restlessness hides the happiness that is within you. It is like a choppy sea that hides the bottom. When the sea gets calm you can see the bottom. In the same way, when the mind gets quiet. You sense the happiness that is within you.
	You can not see a treasure at the bottom of a stormy and muddy lake, through it is there. However, when the wind stops, the water becomes still, and the mud sinks, you can see the treasure. The treasure is there, whether you see it or not. So is happiness. It is always there, only hidden by thoughts, desires and worries.
	You can experience more and more happiness in your life. Only your thoughts stand in the way of experiencing it. Next time you feel happy, stop for a moment and watch the state of your mind. You will be surprised to discover that it is calm, and there are almost no thoughts in your mind. Since the mind is not accustomed to stay in this peaceful state for long, it son becomes active again, and the sense of happiness disappears.

A. On the basis of your reading of the passage, answer the following questions in about 30-40 words each.			(2*4=8)
a) What is common between happiness and the sun?
b) How can we enjoy moments of happiness in our life?
c) How does the restlessness of our mind come in the way of our happiness?
d) How can we detect the treasure at the bottom of a stormy and muddy lake?

B. Vocabulary:										(1*1/2=2)
Choose the correct option:

a) What is meant by the word, 'hidden' in the passage 2?
(i) shown		(ii) reviled		(iii) rewarded	(iv) concealed
b) What is the synonym of, 'scatter' in the passage 1.
(i) differentiate	(ii) deviate	(iii) take		(iv) disperse
c) Give the antonym of the word 'unattainable' in the passage 1.
(i) possible	(ii) achievable	(iii) controllable	(iv) rewarding
d) What is the antonym of the word 'sinks' in the passage 2?
(i) flies		(ii) lifts		(iii) emerges	(iv) floats

2. Write a letter to Chatterjee Sports, Salt Lake, Kolkata placing an order for sports articles to be supplied to you school, B.T. Public School, New Town, Kolkata in 100-120 words. You are Mohit/Manali, sports secretary.				(8)

3. Complete the following story in 100-120 words:								(8)

	In one corner ------ a friendless ------ a tiny light appears ------ very small ------ but light ------ stands and send rays ------ a passerby remarks ------ you will be of more use ------ God-forsaken ------ light says not really ------

 4. The following passage has not been edited. There is one error in each line. Write the missing word along with the word that comes before it and the word that comes after it in your answer sheet. The first one is done for you:				(1*4=4)

							word before	missing word	word after

Making a cartoon an art that					      cartoon                        is		      an
requires a combination hard work,				(a)
and training a sense humour.					(b)
Cartoonists say the cartoons that				(c)
Make us laugh most are time taking.				(d)

5. Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow:						(1*4=4)

It was not only a display of pinpoint precision and military force, but a demonstration of the military's loyalty to democracy, to a new government that had been freely and fairly elected. Only moments before, the highest generals of the South African defence force and police, their chests bedecked with ribbons and medals from days gone by, saluted me and pledged their loyalty.

a) What type of Government was chosen in South Africa?
b) How was it chosen?
c) Write the verb form of the noun 'demonstration'.
d) What was the occasion?

6. Answer the following questions in about 30-40 words:							(2*4=8)

a) What does Nelson Mandela thank the international leaders for?
b) What is the central idea of the poem "A Tiger in the Zoo"?
c) How did Nelson Mandela's hunger for freedom change the course of his life?
d) How does the tiger feel in the zoo? Why?

7. Answer the question in about 100-150 words:								(8)

Freedom is a birthright. It is the most beautiful gift of God. It is valuable for all human beings as well as for other creatures. Describe with reference the poem "A Tiger in the Zoo".


	

