				      MADAM  RIDES  THE  BUS


**Read the following passages and answer the questions that follow:

1. "There was a girl ............ many new unusual experiences.
(i) What was the short name of the girl?
Ans: Valli was the short name of the girl.
(ii) What was Valli's favourite pastime?
Ans: Valli's favourite pastime was standing in front doorway of her house.
(iii) Why did she spend her time all alone?
Ans: She spent her time all alone because she had no playmates of her own age in her street.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "uncommon".
Ans: "unusual".

2. "The most fascinating thing ............ in English: 'Proud! Proud!'"
(i) What did Valli watch daily?
Ans: Valli watched the bus that travelled between her village and the nearest town.
(ii) What was her overwhelming desire?
Ans: Valli's overwhelming desire was to ride the bus.
(iii) Was Valli's wish to ride the bus stronger or weaker?
Ans: Valli's wish to ride the bus was too strong.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "longingly".
Ans: "wistfully".

3. "Over many days and ............ recalculated, planned and replanned."
(i) How did Valli know details about this bus journey?
Ans: Valli knew details about this bus journey from the conversations between her neighbours and commuters.
(ii) What was the distance of the town from Valli's village?
Ans: The distance of the town from Valli's village was six miles.
(iii) How did she pay for her journey?
Ans: She paid thirty paise for her bus journey.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "careful questions".
Ans: "discreet questions".

4. "Well, one fine spring ............ has to get on".
(i) Where was the bus giong?
Ans: The bus was leaving the village and going to the city.
(ii) Who stopped the bus?
Ans: Valli stopped the bus.
(iii) What did the conductor say to Valli?
Ans: The conductor asked Valli to hurry up and come quickly.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "small".
Ans: "tiny".

5. "It was the slack ............ were soft and luxurious".
(i) What were the six or seven passengers doing?
Ans: The six or seven passengers were looking at Valli and laughing with the conductor.
(ii) Why did she avoid everyone's eyes?
Ans: Valli avoided everyone's eyes because she was feeling shy.
(iii) How was the outside of the bus painted?
Ans: The outside of the bus was painted with some green stripes along the sides.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "A time when there is no much work".
Ans: "slack time".

6. Valli devoured everything with ............. the eye could see".
(i) Why did Valli stand up on the seat?
Ans: Valli stood up on her seat because she wanted to look outside.
(ii) Where was she giong to?
Ans: She was going to the city.
(iii) How was Valli feeling?
Ans: Valli was feeling happy and enjoying the ride.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "looked through".
Ans: "peered".

7. "Suddenly she was startled ............ the city all alone?"
(i) What did somebody say to Valli?
Ans: Somebody said to Valli that she should not stand like that and asked her to sit down.
(ii) What did the elderly man advise the child?
Ans: The elderly man advised the child to sit down.
(iii) What did the conductor chime in about Valli?
Ans: The conductor chimed in about Valli calling her as a grown-up woman.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "proudly".
Ans: "haughtily".

8. "An elderly woman came ............ with such a person?"
(i) What did the elderly woman try to do?
Ans: The elderly woman tried to be friendly with Valli.
(ii) Why did Valli find the woman repulsive?
Ans: Valli found the woman absolutely repulsive as she had big holes in her ear lobes and ugly earrings in them. She was also chewing betel nut. Her mouth was full of betel juice and Valli thought that the betel juice can come out any moment of her mouth.
(iii) What did the woman ask her?
Ans: The woman asked Valli if she was all alone.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "causing dislike".
Ans: "repulsive".

9. "Her first journey -- what ............ without her mother's knowledge."
(i) What did Valli had to do for her first journey?
Ans: Valli had to make careful, painstaking and elaborate plans for her first journey.
(ii) What temptations did she has to resist?
Ans: Valli had to resist the temptation to buy peppermints, toys, balloons etc.
(iii) What kind of desire did she have to curb at the village fare?
Ans: Valli had to curb a strong desire to ride the merry-go-round at the village fare.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "spend money carefully".
Ans: "thriftily".

10. "The bus rolled on ............ in the other direction."
(i) Where was the bus going?
Ans: The bus was going to the city cutting across a bare landscape.
(ii) What did the bus seem on the point of gobbling up?
Ans: The bus seem on the point of gobbling up another vehicle that was coming towards a pedestrian crossing the road.
(iii) How did the bus move in the city?
Ans: The bus was moving at a very slow speed because of pedestrians and other obstacles in the city.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "village".
Ans: "hamlet".

11. At last the cow ............ merchandise! Such big crowds!"
(i) Where was the cow?
Ans: The cow moved of the road
(ii) Where did the bus go after passing the train station?
Ans: The bus went to a thorough fare (public path).
(iii) Where was the big crowds?
Ans: The big crowds were in shopping street, thorough fare.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "move violently". 
Ans: "shaking".

12. "When she entered her ............ it completely, can we?"
(i) What did Valli find when she entered her house?
Ans: When Valli came back and entered her house she found her mother awake and talking to one of Valli's aunts, the one from South Street.
(ii) Who was a Chatterbox?
Ans: One of Valli's aunts from the South Street was a chatterbox.
(iii) How did Valli respond?
Ans: Valli did not say anything. She just smiled.
(iv) Pick out the word from the passage that means same as "talkative person".
Ans: "chatterbox".

** Long Answer (LA) Questions :

1. "On and on went her thoughts as she calculated and recalculated, planned and replanned".
In which manner did Valli calculate, plan and prepare herself for the ride on the bus?
Ans: Valli had made careful, painstaking and elaborate plans for her visit to the city. She had saved every coin she could. She overcame the temptation to buy peppermints, toys, balloons and the like. Finally she had saved a total of sixty paise. She suppressed her strong desire to ride on the merry-go-round at the village fair. Her next problem was how to slip out of the house without her mother's knowledge. But she managed this without much difficulty as everyday after lunch her mother would take a nap from about one to four or so. She would visit the city during this period.

2. "Never mind", she said, "I can get on by myself". "You do not have to help me", said Valli to the conductor. She shows extraordinary courage in making the bus journey all alone. Taking inspiration from Valli's character, write how ability and courage to take risk are essential to fulfil one's dreams.
Ans: It is absolutely true that ability and courage to take risk are essential to fulfil one's dream. Valli was an eight years old girl. She never made a journey to outside. She even never rode a bus. Her parents did not allow her to go outside her house. But she mustered up the courage and rode on a bus to make a bus journey. She enjoyed the journey and understand the reality about the outside world. She was a young girl but she made the journey without any difficulty because she had courage to take risk.
      In other words, we can say that the thing or task that seems to be very hard is actually not so tough. We can do it if we have the ability and courage to take risk. If we do not dare to take risk, we loose opportunities to get better.

3. Whenever we want to achieve something, difficulties always come in our way. What did Valli have to do to go and ride in a bus?
						OR
    Once we decide to achieve something, so many difficulties come in our ways. With focused attention we can make that achievement. How did Valli succeed in fulfilling her desire of riding a bus?
Ans: It is true that whenever we want something, so many difficulties do come in our way. But one must be ambitious in life. Achieving goals require perseverance. Valli wanted to ride the bus, however, she did not have the money to do so. The challenge in front of her was to arrange for the required amount of money. Valli had carefully saved whatever stray coins came her way, resisting every temptation to buy peppermints, toys, balloons and the like.
      Finally, she had collected thirty paise. Moreover, she watched the bus, its routine and schedule very carefully. She also listened to people's conversation about their journey. But due to her efforts, finally she accomplished her desire.

4. Compare Valli's journeyto the city with her journey back home. Why was there a change in her mood?
						OR
    "Valli's journey to the city is also her introduction into the mystery of life and death. Elaborate.
						OR
    Why did Valli not enjoy her bus ride back home?
Ans: Valli's journey to the city is also her introduction into the mystery of life and death. While on her way to the city Valli saw a cow running very fast in the middle of the road, right in front of the bus. Valli enjoyed the scene. She kept on laughing initially and her eyes were filled with tears. She saw life in the small cow. This is what life gives us -- happiness, enjoyment. Valli enjoyed the scene.
      On her way back home she saw a dead cow lying on the road. It was hit by some speeding vehicle. She recognised it. It was the same cow that filled her life with fun and joy only a few minutes before. She was overcome with the feelings of sadness. She realised how death can change the things.
      "What had been a lovable, beautiful creature jus a little while ago had now suddenly lost its charm and its life and looked so horrible, so frightening." The memory of the dead cow haunted Valli and she did not enjoy her remaining journey.














