					      THE  THIEF'S  STORY


**Short Answer (SA) Questions:

1. When and how did Hari Singh meet Anil?
Ans: Hari Singh met Anil when he was watching a wrestling match. Hari Singh tried to befriend Anil.

2. How did Hari Singh succeed in his profession?
Ans: He would frequently change his name to dupe the police. He would find out a kind and simple person for his target. He could wait until he had a favourable chance.

3. Why did Hari Singh change his name every month?
Ans: Hari Singh was a fifteen year old boy who introduces himself to Anil as Hari Singh. He was an experienced thief. He changed his name every month for his own safety from the police and his former employers.

4. Why did Anil agree to feed Hari Singh?
Ans: Anil needed a helping hand who could cook for him. When Hari Singh said that he could cook well. Anil agreed to feed him.

5. How did the thief realise that Anil knew that he was robbed?
Ans: When Anil gave him a fifty-rupees note it was still damp. The damp note was telling the whole story. Hari Singh knew that Anil was intelligent enough to understand what had happened in the rainy night.

6. Why was it not easy for the thief to rob Anil?
Ans: It was not easy for the thief to rob Anil as he was the most trusting person he had ever seen. The thief knew that it was easy to rob a greedy man because he could afford to be robbed. But to rob a careless man like Anil sometimes gave no pleasure of the work as he even did not notice that he had been robbed.

7. What was the thief's reaction when he took Anil's money?
Ans: As the thief got the money, he quickly crawled out of the room. When he was on the road, he began to run. He had the notes at his waist, held them by the string of his pyjamas. Later on he slowed down to walk and counted the notes. He thought that with those 600 rupees he could lead a luxurious life like an oil-rich Arab at least for a week or two.

8. How, according to Hari Singh, would the greedy man, the rich man and the poor man react when they had lost their goods?
Ans: Hari Singh made a study of men's faces when they lost their goods. According to the thief, on losing their goods, a greedy man's face would show fear, the rich man's face would show anger and the poor man's face would show acceptance.

9. How did Hari Singh know that Anil had forgiven him?
Ans: It seems Anil knew about theft but neither his lips nor his eyes showed anything. He gave him fifty rupees and told him that now he would be paid regularly. He informed him that he would teach him to write sentences. It shows that Anil had forgiven him.

10. Why did the thief smile without any effect towards the end of the story?
Ans: The thief smile without any effect towards the end of the story in his most appealing way. But unlike as on previous occasions, this smile was natural and from the innermost corner of his heart. Being spontaneous, the smile was "without any effort".

**Long Answer (LA) Questions:

1. "Everyone must have a chance to reform". How did Anil worked upon these values and succeeded?
				OR
    'Money cannot make a man as much as education can'. Elucidate this statement.
Ans: Hari Singh had all the sharp wickedness to rob a person. He knew how to rob and whom to rob. He chose Anil for his purpose because the later was simple and easy to approach. But when Anil started teaching him how to write words and then sentences and adding numbers, a good man in Hari Singh started dreaming of a life full of honestly  and dignity. He got the chance to rob, he robed but the dream of being educated did not let him go. He returned to be educated.

2. "Love, trust and compassion transformed Hari Singh". Explain with reference to the story "The Thief's Story".
Ans: It is love and sympathy which has transformed Hari Singh into a respectable person. Anil Singh's job was to write for a magazine. His income was not regular. He led an easygoing life. Anil can easily understand that he had been robbed when he found the notes wet. Anil does not react but rather offers him fifty rupees in the morning.
    Initially also Anil promised Hari Singh to teach him cooking as well as to write sentences. It was thus good action of Anil that helped Hari Singh to forget about the money and gave more importance to education.

3. How did Hari Singh happen to stay with Anil? How did he stay with Anil before he tried to rob him?
Ans: Though Hari Singh was only fifteen years old yet he was a seasoned and successful thief. He met Anil at a wrestling match. He decided to rob him. He got himself introduced to Anil. He lied that he could cook. Anil allowed Hari Singh to stay with him. He would not pay but feed him. Anil did not turn him away though he cooked hopeless food. Anil promised to teach Hari Singh to cook as well as to write. Due to lack of a regular income, Anil did not pay him any money. Hari Singh prepared the morning tea. He cheated Anil in the shopping and made about a rupee a day. Anil trusted him completely though he knew everything. It was quite difficult to rob Anil, a trusting and careless person. Anyhow he tried to rob him because his thievish nature urged him to do so.

4. Why did Hari Singh decide to return stolen money? What light does it throw on his character?
Ans: After stealing the money, Hari Singh rushed to the railway station to catch 10:30 Express to Lucknow. But for some inexplicable reason he did not board the train. He decided to return to the man whom he had robbed. He sat down in the shelter of the Clock Tower and began to reflect upon his life. Suddenly he realised that Anil was helping him to learn reading and writing and that could change his life once and for all. In his further mediation he made up his mind to return.
    It shows Hari Singh was grateful to Anil for helping him learn read and write. It also shows that deep in heart he had a desire to change the course of his life. He wanted to give up theft and wanted to lead a life of a respectable person.

5. If you were Anil, would you have pardoned the thief? If Yes/No why?
Ans: Once Hari singh, a seasonal thief met Anil at a wrestling match. He gave Anil an artificial smile and asked for work in case he could feed him. Anil agreed but on every purchase Hari Singh made a profit. One day Hari Singh stole Anil's money which was kept under the mattress and left for the station. But the train left. In between, a good sense prevailed on Hari Singh. He slipped the money under the mattress and slept. After tea, Anil gave Hari Singh a fifty rupee note and promised to pay him regularly. The note was still wet. Anil understood everything but did not expose the thief's doing.
    If I had been Anil, I would have pardoned him and traced the reasons for his thievish nature. I would give him an opportunity to mend his ways after serving a warning on the thief.

6. "A thief in Hari Singh changed into a good human being". How far was Anil's considerate nature responsible for this transformation?
Ans: Hari Singh was an experienced thief who had robbed many people at such a tender age of fifteen years. He joined Anil as a cook with a motive of stealing money. But Anil was a kind and considerate person. He employed Hari Singh and taught him how to cook. He trusted him like his younger brother. He was always sympathetic towards him. Hari Singh found it was very difficult to rob such a good human being. He stole money but his conscience did not allow him to run away. He came back and became a good human being. There was a change in his heart. Thus, it was Anil's considerate nature which was responsible for this transformation.
    