					MODEL  QUESTION  PAPER

      TIME: 2 HOURS									TOTAL MARKS: 50


1. Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow:						(1*8=8)

	One of the greatest advances in modern technology has been the invention of computers. They are widely used in industries and in universities. Now there is hardly any sphere of human life where computers have not been pressed into the service of man. We are heading fast towards the day when a computer will be as much a part of man's daily life as a telephone or a calculator.

	Computers are capable of doing extremely complicated work in all branches of learning. They can solve the most complex mathematical problems or put thousands of unrelated facts in order. These machines can be put to varied uses. For instances, they can provide information on the best way to prevent traffic jams. This whole process by which machines can be used to work for us enable the human beings to enjoy more leisure than they do today. The coming of automation is bound to have important social consequences.

	Some years ago, an expert in automation, Sir Leon Bagrit, pointed out that it was a mistake to believe that this machines could 'think'. There is no possibility that human beings will be "controlled ny machines". Though computers are capable of learning from their mistakes and improving on their performance, they need detailed instructions from human beings to operate. They can never, as it were, lead independent lives or "rule the world" by making decisions on their own.

	Sir Leon said that in future, computers would be developed which would be small enough to carry in the pocket. Ordinary people would then be able to use them to obtain valuable information. Computers could be plugged into a national network and be used like radios. For instance, people going on holiday could be informed about weather conditions. Car drivers can be given alternative routes when there are traffic jams. It will also be possible to make tiny translating machines. This will enable people without any difficulty to read foreign publications.

On the basis of your reading of the passage, answer the following questions:						

1. What is the greatest advancement in modern technology?
2. What complicated works are computers capable of doing?
3. Write one use of computers.
4. Explain automation.
5. Why can't computers lead independent lives or rule the world?
6. How would computers as translating machines help people?
7. What was the prediction of Sir Leon about computers' use in the future?
8. How can computers help people going on holiday? Choose the right option from the given alternatives.
    a) To obtain valuable informations
    b) To inform about weather condition
    c) To solve the most complex mathematical problems
    d) All above

2. You are Abhi/Aruna living in Mayur Bihar, New Delhi. Write a letter to the editor of "The Hindustan Times", New Delhi about the incidents of violence taking place with the aged couple living alone at home, drawing the attentions of the authorities towards the problem in 100-120 words.											(8)

3. Read the outlines given below of a story. Write the story using these outlines and your own ideas. Write with suitable title in about 150-200 words.											(10)
	A merchant riding home from a fair --- a large sum of money with him --- sudden heavy rainfall --- merchant get wet --- grumbles --- shortly after attacked by a robber --- robber's attempt to shoot --- failure --- power damp --- the merchant escapes.

4. Read the passage given below and fill in the blanks by choosing the most appropriate word from the given options.		(4)

	Do not worry if you (a) ____ too many errors as a new research (b) ____ that learning becomes (c) ____ if conditions (d) ____ arranged such that students make mistakes.
(a) (i) commit or make	(ii) committed or made	(iii) will make	(iv) makes
(b) (i) prove		(ii) proves			(iii) will prove	(iv) proved
(c) (i) tough		(ii) easiest			(iii) easy		(iv) tougher
(d) (i) are			(ii) have			(iii) has		(iv) will

5. Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow:						(4)

	The House -- the only one in the entire valley-sat on the crest of a low hill. From this height one could see the river and the field of ripe corn dotted with the flowers that always promised a good harvest.
	The only thing the earth needed was a downpour or at least a shower:
	Throughout the morning Lencho -- who knew his fields intimately-had done nothing else but see the sky towards the north-east.
	"Now we're really going to get some water, woman."
	The woman who was preparing supper, replied. "Yes, God willing".

(a) Where was the house situated?
(b) Which two things could one see from this height?
(c) Which word in the passage means the same as "heavy fall of rain"?
(d) What did the earth need?

6. Answer the following questions in about 30-40 words:							(2*4=8)

(a) How does Robert Frost caution the common man?
(b) Why does the postmaster send money to Lencho? Why does he sign the letter "God"?
(c) What is the "Dust of Snow"? Why does the poet call the poem "The Dust of Snow"?
(d) Do you think that the post-office employees were "A bunch of crooks"?

7. Answer the question in about 100-150 words:								(8)

How did the hailstone affect Lencho's field? What was Lencho's only hope?

