					FOOTPRINTS  WITHOUT  FEET

** Short Answer (SA) Questions:

1. Why were the two boys in London surprised and fascinated?
Ans: The two boys in London saw fresh muddy footprints appearing on the steps of a house but the barefooted man was not visible. So they were surprised and fascinated.

2. What did Griffin do inside the store?
Ans: Griffin broke and opened the boxes and wrappers and dressed himself in warm clothes. He ate and drank to his heart's content. In the end, he laid down on the pile of quilts to sleep.

3. What did Griffin do in the shop of a theatrical company?
Ans: He wore bandages round his forehead and put on dark glasses, a false nose, big bushy side whiskers and a large hat. He attacked the shopkeeper from behind and robbed him of all his money.

4. What was the "curious episode" that took place in the clergyman's study?
Ans: One morning, the clergyman and his wife awakened by noise. They saw nobody there. They were shocked to find that their money had been stolen from the desk.

5. The landlords's wife was convinced that Griffin was an "eccentric scientist". What made her think of Griffin in these terms?
Ans: Griffin remained indoors and did not mix up with others. His habits were strange and his appearance was fantastic. All these things to Griffin made the landlady think that he was an "eccentric scientist".

6. Griffin was rather a lawless person. Pick out instances which prove that he was lawless.
Ans: He set fire to a house which did not belong to him. He took away clothes without paying for them. He hit a shopkeeper and stole his money. He robbed clergyman's money. All these show that he was a lawless person.

7. What did the scientist do when he became furious? Why were the people in the bar horrified? What happened to the constable?
Ans: The scientist took off his bandages, and spectacles and became headless man. the people in the bar were shocked to see a headless man. Griffin hit the constable Jaffers hard and made him senseless.

8. How do you assess Griffin as a scientist?
Ans: Griffin was a brilliant scientist. He invented some drug and made himself as an invisible person. But he misused his scientific discovery and became a lawless person. Griffin was, thus not a true scientist.

9. Why did the landlord want to eject Griffin? Why did Griffin set the house on fire?
Ans: The landlord wanted to eject Griffin from his house because his activities were whimsical. Griffin set the house on fire to take his revenge on the landlord.

10. Who was Mr. Jaffers? What was his surprise?
Ans: Mr. Jaffers was a police constable. His surprise was that he was ordered to arrest a lawless person who was totally invisible.

11. Why were the clergyman and his wife surprised when they opened the room?
Ans: Both the clergyman and his wife surprised because the room was empty. They searched everywhere but couldn't find anyone. Yet the desk had been opened and the housekeeping money was missing.

12. What did the scientist do when Mrs. Hall confronted him?
Ans: When Mrs. Hall confronted the scientist, he threatened her and threw off his bandages, whiskers, spectacles and even the nose in a minute. The people were horrified to see the headless man.

13. How did Griffin escape?
Ans: Griffin began to throw off his bandages, whiskers, spectacles and even the nose. THen he became even more invisible by throwing off all the garments one after another. They had to follow a man and none knew where he was.

14. Do you think Griffin's discovery was of any use to humanity?
Ans: No. Griffin's discovery though remarkable, was of no use to anyone except himself. He began robbing money and other things and even assaulting people after he became invisible.

**Long Answer (LA) Questions:

1. 'Brilliant scientist though he was, Griffin was a lawless person.' Does this statement approve the apprehension that science in wrong hands is Devil's Pandora Box?
Ans: Griffin was a brilliant scientist. He had discovered a rare drug that could make a human body invisible. This made Griffin an arrogant lawless person. He broke the law more than once but never for a good reason. He could decide that his discovery would be for the sake of human being, but he did not do that. His lawlessness made the law helpless. All his actions prove that science in devil's hand is disastrous.

2. 'Griffin could use his discovery for welfare of the people but misuses it to take revenge.' Discuss with reference to the story "Footprints Without Feet".
						OR
Do you think Griffin misused a scientific discovery or he took advantages of his discovery?
						OR
Griffin misused his invention instead of using it for the betterment of the society. Do you think moral values are important along with intellectual abilities? Discuss.
Ans: Griffin was a scientist who had made a discovery due to which he could be invisible. But he was rather a lawless scientist, who misused his scientific discovery for his petty, selfish gains. He set his landlord's house on fire, when he was asked to vacate it. He entered the store invisibly, stole clothes and food. At another shop, he attacked the shopkeeper from behind and ran away after robbing his money.
        At Iping, he stole the clergy's money from his desk and hit Mrs Hall by throwing a chair on her. He blew on the police constable Mr Jaffers and Knocked him down. In this way, Griffin misused his scientific discovery without making benefit to the mankind.

3. The modern world has created great scientific inventions. But very often this inventions are more misused than used for the benefit of man. Griffin had made wonderful discovery; but he used it for unlawful means. Write a paragraph on "Science is being more misused than used".
Ans: Science is being more misused than used. The present time is highly dependent on science and technology. In the 21st century, survival without gadgets and electronics is unimaginable. But there are various instances where science is being misused to create panic and terror in the society. Scientific experiments on various deadly diseases are let out to cause mass destruction. Technology is used more for warfare purpose, to kill and to terrorize. The resulting products of science have been valuable to human society and have greatly raised the quality of life. But they have also led to the growth of means to destroy human society.

4. "Scientific discoveries have made life easier but insecure." Explainwith reference to the story "Footprints Without Feet" written by H.G.Wells.
Ans: There is no doubt that Scientific discoveries have made life easier. Take any sphere of human activity, electricity, telecommunications, electronics, computer etc. , these have totally changed man's life. We can interact and walk on moon. Trip to Mars is the next on our agenda. We can fly like birds. Supersonic planes fly at more than the speed of sound. Wonderful drugs can overcome deadly diseases. Surgery can replace defective limbs. Despite all these discoveries, human life is becoming insecure. weapons of mass destruction are a constant danger. The fear of chemical or biological warfarelooms large. Diseases like AIDS and SARS can destroy haman race.

5. "A lawless scientist is a curse to the society." Discuss.
Ans: It is true that a lawless scientist is a curse to the society. A true scientist uses his discoveries for the good of the society and welfare of the people. It helps the nation to progress. A lawless scientist increases the miseries and sufferings of society. In this story we find how Griffin misuses his discovery. He causes pain and sufferings to others. He causes destruction. Suppose the nuclear weapons fall in the hand of a lawless scientist, he can cause widespread destruction. He may ruin the achievements of other scientists. That's why the leaders of the world are worried about chemical weapons falling into the hands of lawless heads of governments or terrorists. If this happens, all the scientists of the world will be doomed.