				HOW TO TELL WILD ANIMALS


**Read the following passages and answer the questions that follow:

1.  If ever you should go by chance
    To jungles in the east;
    And if there should to you advance
    A large and tawny beast,
    If he roars at you as you’re dyin’
    You’ll know it is the Asian Lion ….
(i) How does one identify the Asian Lion?
Ans: The Asian Lion is identified by its size, colour and roar, it is a large tawny beast.
(ii) How does an Asian Lion react on seeing a man?
Ans: When Asian Lion sees a man, it roars and takes no time in killing him.
(iii) Pick the word from the stanza that means the same as "All of a sudden".
Ans: "by chance"

2.  Or if some time when roaming round,
     A noble wild beast greets you, 
    With black stripes on a yellow ground,
    Just notice if he eats you.
    This simple rule may help you learn
    The Bengal Tiger to discern.
(i) Who is the 'noble wild beast' here?
Ans: The noble wild beast is The Bengal Tiger here.
(ii) How does this beast look?
Ans: This beast looks as if it is coloured with black stripes on a yellow ground.
(iii) Pick the word from the stanza that means the same as "to recognise".
Ans: "discern".

3.  If strolling forth, a beast you view,
    Whose hide with spots in peppered,
    As soon as he has lept on you,
    You’ll know it is the Leopard.
    Twill do no good to roar with pain,
    He’ll only lep and lep again.
(i) How can you recognise a leopard?
Ans: The Leopard can be recognised by its spots on the skin.
(ii) How is it different from the Bengal Tiger?
Ans: Bengal Tiger has black stripes on a yellow ground while the Leopard has round black spots on the body.
(iii) Pick the word from the stanza that means the same as "a large animal of the cat family".
Ans: "Leopard".

4.  If when you’re walking round your yard
    You meet a creature there,
    Who hugs you very, very hard,
    Be sure it is a Bear,
    If you have any doubts, I guess
    He’ll give you just one more caress.
(i) Whom can you meet in the yard?
Ans: In the yard, we can meet a bear.
(ii) How can one recognise that he is meeting a bear?
Ans: One can recognise that he is meeting a bear by its hard hug.
(iii) Pick the word from the stanza that means the same as "loving touch" or "gentle touch".
Ans: "caress".
(iv) How does it treat the man?
Ans: When a bear meets a man, it hugs him very hard.

5.  Though to distinguish beasts of prey
     A novice might nonplus,
    The crocodile you always may
    Tell from the Hyena thus:
    Hyenas come with merry smiles;
    But if they weep they’re Crocodiles.
(i) What can happen with a novice?
Ans: A novice can be confused to recognise the wild animals.
(ii) What is the difference between Crocodile and Hyena?
Ans: The difference between Crocodile and Hyena is that the crocodiles weep while the Hyena smiles.
(iii) Pick the word from the stanza that means the same as "confused". 
Ans: "nonplus".

6. The true Chameleon is small,
    A lizard sort of things;
    He hasn’t any ears at all,
    And not a single wing.
    If there is nothing on the tree,
    ‘Tis the Chameleon you see.
(i) Which animal has been described in the stanza?
Ans: The Chameleon has been described in the stanza.
(ii) How can it be identified?
Ans: If an animal does not have ears and wings and it is just like a lizard, then it can be identified as a chemeleon.
(iii) Pick the word from the stanza that means the same as "a small reptile".
Ans: "Chemeleon".
(iv) Where does this animal live?
Ans: The chemeleon can be seen on trees.


**Long Answer Questions (LA):

1. The poet has used some special qualities to describe the animals and create humour in the poem. Each of us also has some special qualities which make us quite different from others. Do you agree with this statement? Comment with reference to the poem "How To Tell Wild Animals".
Ans: The poet has used the selected words and expressions to describe the animals and to create humour. For example she says, "A noble beast greets you" for "The Bengal Tiger", A bear - hugs you" "Crocodiles weep" and "Hyena smiles". Like this animals, each of us has some special qualities which make us quite different from others. For example, we face many people in a day, but even then we can easily recognise them only through their voice or through their special habits. This distinctive qualities give them a unique identification. This statement is absolutely right.

2. The poet uses humour in a perfect manner in her poem - "How To Tell Wild Animals" to bring smile on the face of readers. In our daily life also humour is the best medicine for every ailment. Do you agree? Comment
					OR
    "Humour is the perfect medicine for all diseases". Discuss this statement by taking examples from the poem "How To Tell Wild Animals".
Ans: The poet talks about wild animal in a funny manner. All the dangerous, wild animals like lions, tigers, leopards, bears, hyenas, crocodile, chemeleon have been portrayed humourously. The poet describes their dangerous activities in such a manner that they produce laughter.


