		            TWO  STORIES  ABOUT  FLYING : HIS  FIRST  FLIGHT


**Read the stanza and answer the questions that follows:

1. The young seagull was ............ he could not move. (First Paragraph)
(i) Why was the young seagull alone?
Ans: The young seagull was alone because his two brothers and sister had already flown away the day before.
(ii) Why did he not fly with his brothers and sister?
Ans: He did not fly with his brothers and sister because he was afraid.
(iii) Where did he sleep that night?
Ans: He slept in a little hole under the ledge.
(iv) How did his parents try to make him fly?
Ans: They invited him encouragingly. They also threated him that he would die of hunger if he did not fly.

2. That was twenty-four ............ him with his cowardice. (Second Paragraph)
(i) What had happened twenty four hours ago?
Ans: Twenty-four hours ago, The young seagull was left alone. His parents, brothers and sister had flown away.
(ii) What did the young seagull watch all day?
Ans: The young seagull watched all day his brothers and sister flying over the sea.
(iii) What did his brother do?
Ans: His brother caught his first fish.
(iv) Why did his family taunt the young seagull?
Ans: His family taunted the young seagull for his cowardice.

3. The sun was now ............ again to whet it. (3rd and 4th Paragraph)
(i) Who was looking at the young seagull?
Ans: The mother of the young seagull was looking at him.
(ii) What were his brothers doing?
Ans: His brothers were dozing with their heads sunk into their necks.
(iii) What was the condition of the seagull?
Ans: His condition was troubled due to keen hunger.
(iv) What did he like to do?
Ans: He loved to tear the food and scrape his beak now and then to whet it.

4. "Ga, ga, ga ," he ............ dived at the fish. (5th Paragraph)
(i) What did the young seagull cry for?
Ans: The young seagull cried for food.
(ii) Did the mother pay attention to his request?
Ans: No, the mother did not pay attention to his request.
(iii) Why did the young seagull utter a joyful scream?
Ans: When he saw his mothe rcoming towards him with a piece of fish, he uttered a joyful scream.
(iv) What was the real intention of the mother?
Ans: The mothe rwanted him to fly. She tempted him to dive for the food and fly.

5.  With a loud scream ............ felt a bit dizzy. (5th Paragraph)
(i) Why did he fall outward?
Ans: He fell outwards when he tried to snatch food from his mother's beak.
(ii) Did he fly intentionally?
Ans: No, he did not fly intentionally.
(iii) What did he feel when he fell into the space?
Ans: When he fell into the space a monstrous terror seized him and his heart stood still.
(iv) What happened the next moment?
Ans: The next moment he felt his wings spread outwards.

6. Then he flapped his ............ sideways and cawed amusedly. (5th, 6th, 7th Paragraph)
(i) How did his mother respond?
Ans: His mother uttered Ga, ga, ga and flew over him.
(ii) Why were they happy?
Ans: They were happy because the young seagull had learnt how to fly.
(iii) What did he forget completely?
Ans: He forgot completely that he was afraid of flying.
(iv) Why did he commend himself?
Ans: He commended himself for his ability to fly successfully.

7. His parents and his ............ made his first flight. (8th Paragraph)
(i) Where were his parents and brothers?
Ans: His parents and brothers had landed on the surface of the sea.
(ii) Why did the young seagull scream?
Ans: The young seagull screamed because he felt himself sinking into the water.
(iii) What did the young seagull learn?
Ans: The young seagull learnt two things - flying and floating.
(iv) How was he rewarded by his family members?
Ans: He was offered scraps of dog fish by the members of his family.


** Very Short Answer (VSA) Questions:

1. Why was the young seagull alone?
Ans: The young seagull was alone because his brothers and sister had already flown.

2. Why did he not fly with his brothers and sisters?
Ans: He did not fly because he was afraid.

3. Where did he sleep that night?
Ans: He slept in a little hole under the ledge.

4. Where did young seagull live?
Ans: The young seagull lived alone on his ledge.

5. Why was he afraid to fly?
Ans: He was afraid to fly because his wings would never support him.

6. What did he see throughout the day?
Ans: He saw his parents perfecting his brothers ans sister in the art of flying.

7. How did they taunt him?
Ans: They taunted him with his cowardice.

8. Who took pity on the young seagull?
Ans: His mother pitied on the young seagull.

9. Who had already landed on the green flooring?
Ans: His parents, brothers, sister had already landed on the green flooring.

10. How did the family show their happiness for the young seagull?
Ans: They offered him scraps of dog fish through their beaks.


** Short Answers (SA) Questions:

1. Why was the young seagull afraid to fly?
Ans: Whenever the young seagull took a little run forward to the extreme edge of the ledge and attempted to flap his wings, he became afraid. Seeing the vast area of the sea, he thought his wings would never support him.

2. How were seagull's parents helping his brothers and sisters for "perfecting them in the art of flight"?
Ans: The young seagull was afraid of flying, but his two brothers and a sister had started flying. But his parents were teaching them to be perfect in the art of flying. They were teaching them how to skim the waves and how to dive for fish.

3. "He felt the heat because he had not eaten since the previous nightfall". What did the young seagull do to satisfy his hunger?
Ans: The young seagull was feeling hungry because he could not fly and his family had left him alone for it. To satisfy his hunger, he was forced to eat whatever he found.

4. Why could the young seagull not reach his parents without flying?
Ans: He could not reach his parents without flying because on each side of him the edge ended in a sheer fall in a verticle cliff, with the sea below. Then, between him and his parents there was a deep and wide crack in the land.

5. "Still they took no notice of him". What did the seagull do to draw the attention of his family?
Ans: The young seagull stepped slowly out to the extreme edge of the ledge. He was standing on one leg with the other leg hidden under his wing. He closed one eye, then the other and pretended to be asleep and they took no notice of him.

6. What was his family doing on the plateau when seagull failed to draw their attention?
Ans: The two brothers and the sister of the young seagull were half asleep with their heads sunk into their necks. His father was preening the feathers with his beak on his white back. Only his mother, standing on a little mound on the plateau, was looking at him.

7. "But he keep calling plaintively, and after a minute or so he uttered a joyful scream". Why did the young seagull utter a joyful scream?
Ans: The young seagull was desperately hungry. So, he screamed with joy when he saw his mother flying across to him with a piece of fish in her beak. He leaned out eagerly, tapping the rock with his feet trying to get nearer to her.

8. "Ga ga ga", he cried begging her to bring him some food. To whom was the young seagull begging and did she respond?
Ans: The young seagull begging to his mother to bring him some food.But his mother's motive was to teach him flying. So she stopped flying when she reached near him so that he might attempt to fly.

9. How did the young seagull start flying?
Ans: The young seagull was 'maddened by hunger'. when he dived at the piece of fish in his mother's beak. But he fell outwards and downwardswith a loud scream. When his mother swooped upwards, he followed her and thus he started flying.

10. "He dropped his legs to stand on the green sea". How his family react when he did so?
Ans: Being tired and weak with hunger, the young seagull dropped his legs to stand on the green sea. His entire family came around himscreaming, praising him and their beaks were offering him scraps of dog-fish.

11. When did the seagull's fight begin? Where did it end?
Ans: The seagull's fight began when he moved to the brink of the ledge. He dived at the fish, which was in his mother's beak. His fight ended when, after being tired of his first flight and being weak, he dropped himself on the surface of the sea and floated on it.

12. How did the seagull get over his fear of the water?
Ans: After his first flight, the seagull was tired of his strange experience. He dropped his two legs to stand on the green sea. He screamed fearfully and attempted to rise again flapping his wings. He overcame his fear of the water by floating on it.

13. Do you sympathise with the seagull? Why?
Ans: I sympathise with the seagull because, due to his fear of flying, he had to remain lonely and hungry, after his family had left him to suffer. He could not muster courage to fly like his brothers and sister.

14. How did the seagull express his excitement when he saw his mother bringing food for him?
Ans: The young seagull uttered a joyful scream when he saw his mother picking up a piece of the fish and flying across to him with it. He leaned out eagerly, tapping the rock with his feet.

15. How did the young seagull's parents teach their children the art of flying?
Ans: The seagull's parents had taught their children how to skim the waves and how to dive for the fish. They encourged them raising loud shrill sound when their older son caught his first herring and ate it greedly.


** Long Answers (LA) Questions:

1. Why was the young seagull left alone in the ledge by his family?
Ans: The young seagull was afraid to fly. His father and mother wanted him to go and fly with them. But whenever he had taken a little run forward to the extreme edge of the ledge and tried to move his wings he became afraid. He failed to muster up courage to thrust himself forcibly in the space, and started flying. His two brothers and his sister had the wings shorter than him but they started flying. But the young seagull somehow thought that his wings would not support him for it. For this, he was scolded by his parents, who gave a threat to him and he was left alone in the ledge.

2. How did the young seagull learn floating on the sea?
Ans: After flying for sometime, the young seagull came near the sea. He was flying straight over it. He saw, a vast green sea beneath him, with little ridges moving over it. His brothers and sister had landed on the sea and they were calling in a shrill voice and beckoning to him. He dropped his legs to stand on the green sea. His legs sank into water. He screamed with fright and attempted to rise again flapping his wings. But he was tired and weak with hunger. He was exhausted due to flying for so long. His feet sank into green sea, and then his belly touched it and he sank no farther. He was floating on it, and around him his family was screaming, praising him and offering him food from their beaks. This is how he learnt floating on the sea.

3. How do you find the seagull in the beginning and at the end of the lesson?
Ans: In the beginning , we find the young seagull too frightened and terrified to fly. He had bigger wings as compared to his two brothers and sister. But still he was afraid even to attempt flying. When they flew away, he could gather courage to thrust himself forcibly in space, which made him scared and desperate. When he was starving for a day, his mother came across to him with a piece of fish in her beak. When she reached near him, she stopped and 'maddened by hunger', he dived at the fish. But his mother had swooped upward. He found his wings spread and was more confident now. In the end we see him flying till he was tired and dropped himself on the surface of the sea.

4. What methods were used by the seagull's family to help him overcome his fear of flying? 
Ans: The young seagull was scared of flying. His brothers and sister had started flying but he could not muster courage to do so. His parents scolded him shrilly and threatened to let him starve on the ledge unless he flew away. When his family left him, he felt the pangs of hunger. Next day when he saw his mother with a piece of fish in her beak, he begged her for food. She flew across to him, but halted when the piece of fish in her beak was just within reach of the young seagull. The young seagull dived at the fish, but now her mother swooped upwards. Gradually his fear of flying was over and he enjoyed it now.

5. The young seagull was "trying to find some means of reacting his parents without having to fly". Was he successful in doing so?
Ans: After being left alone by his family, the young seagull was hungry. So he wanted to join his family on the plateau. But he could not do so unless he tried to fly. As he was afraid of flying he was trying to find some other means to reach them. But on each isde of him the ledge ended in a steep fall in a vertical cliff, with the sea below.
      Moreover between him and his parents there was a deep and wide crack in the earth. He could reach them without flying if he could only move towards north along with the steep rock. There was no ledge and he could not fly.
      And above him he could see nothing. The vertical cliff was very steep, and at the top of it was perhaps farther away than the sea beneath him. So he was not able to reach them without flying.

6. Do you think hunger was a good motivation for the young seagull in his first flight? Comment.
Ans: Yes, I do think that hunger played a vital role in the young seagull's attempt to start flying. He was left alone on the ledge by his family because he would not try to fly with them. His parents scolded him in a shrill voice and threatened him of starvation, but he still was afraid to fly. Then they left him alone. He was so hungry that he had to live on starvation, but he still was afraid to fly. Then they left him alone. He was so hungry that he had to live on whatever he could find there. When he saw his mother with a piece of fish in her beak, he begged her for food. Then he uttered a joyfulscream when he saw his mother flying across to him with a piece of fish in her beak. But she stopped when she came opposite to him. When the young seagull realised that she won't come nearer, and 'maddened by hunger', he dived at the fish. This was his first attempt to fly. Gradually when his hesitation and fear were removed, he started flying which he enjoyed very much.

7. "Then he completely forgot that he had not always been able to fly". Comment on the young seagull's first flight in light of this statement.
Ans: The young seagull was suffering from the pangs of hunger after his family left him. Next day when he saw them on the plateau, he tried to draw their attention. Then his mother flew across to him with a piece of fish in her beak. But she stopped opposite him with her motionless wings. He could no more tolerate the hunger and "maddened by hunger, he dived at the fish" though terrified, he felt his wings spread outwards. He could feel the tips of his wings cutting through the air. Now he was soaring gradually downwards and outwards. He was no more afraid of flying now. He flapped his wings once and he soared upwards. He screamed to encourage himself and share his happiness. He forgot that previously he was not able to fly.

8. Fear and lack of confidence stop one from learning new things. Do you agree? How did these two traits of the young seagull make him coward? How did he overcome these shortcomings?
Ans: Yes, it is true that fear and lack of confidence stop one from learning new things as in the story, the young seagull lacked the value of courage and confidence in his character. He was too scared of flying. His family tried hard to make him fly but he refused to do so because of his fear of sinking in the sea water. They even scolded him for his cowardice. They tried to tempt him with food but he was not willing to learn flying. Once he dived, his fear disappeared and he enjoyed his first flight. It is a fact that unless we try for something and overcome our fear, we cannot learn anything.
      Confidence and motivation are the two most important traits that make any learning possible.

9. "Hunger made the young seagull mad and gave him success". How can you explain it and justify with the story?
					OR
    Hunger is a great motivational force. It is sure that a person can take any extreme step for food. How far do you agree?
Ans: It is a fact that hunger makes us mad and every person works for food. It is only hunger that encourages and forces us to do work. If it is not in our life, all the boundationof work will automatically be finished. Every person works for food and to satisfy his hunger. No one in this universe can remain hungry. This hunger makes us work day and night. It can change the mentality of any human being as well as any creature.
      We find that young seagull did not gather courage to fly; when he saw fish in the mouth of his mother, he gathered courage and flew over the ledge. He could not control himself at the sight of the food and jumped at the fish. He fell from the ledge and tried to flap his wings. Thus he found himself flying into the air.

10. "Mother is the first teacher". Do you agree with this statement? Explain with reference to the young seagull.
Ans: Yes, it is true that mother is the first teacher. It is a well known point for all. A baby takes birth and first of all sees mother's face. It is mother who gives him a new life by feeding him. The mother helps a baby to walk him first step. The mother introduces him to this world, gives him knowledge of relations.
      The same thing we find in this story, when no one could encourage the young seagull to fly, his mother thought out a plan and took a piece of fish near him, but she did not go nearer and her plan worked.



			TWO  STORIES  ABOUT  FLYING : THE BLACK AEROPLANE


**Read the stanza and answer the questions that follows:

1. "The moon was coming ............ thirty in the morning." (First Paragraph)
(i) Who is 'me' and 'I' in the passage?
Ans: 'Me' and 'I' refer to the pilot flying the Dakota Aeroplane, who is the author himself.
(ii) What does he mean by "the clear sky"?
Ans: By clear sky, he means that the stars were shining and there were no cloud in the sky.
(iii) What was he dreaming about?
Ans: He was dreaming about his pleasant holiday and how he will be with his family soon.
(iv) Where was he flying the old Dakota?
Ans: He was flying the old Dakota over France back to England.

2. "I should call Paris ............ now, DS 088, Over." (Second Paragraph)
    "I checked the map ............ degrees west towards England". (Fourth Paragraph)
(i) Why did he make a call to Paris Control room?
Ans: He made a call to Paris Control room to inform about his flight.
(ii) What advice did he get from the Control room?
Ans: The control room advised him to turn twelve degrees west.
(iii) How many fuel tanks were there inhis plane?
Ans: He had two fuel tanks in his aeroplane.
(iv) What did he see in front of him?
Ans: He saw the light of a big city in front of him.

3. "I'll be in time ............ was an easy flight." (5th Paragraph)
    "Paris was about 150 ............ the north or south." (6th Paragraph)
    "I ought to go ............ I wanted that breakfast." (7th Paragraph)
    "I'll take the risk ............ straight into the storm". (8th Paragraph)
(i) Why did he call it 'an easy flight'?
Ans: He called it an easy flight because it was a clear sky and there was no disturbance. Everything was going well.
(ii) What was he thinking?
Ans: He was thinking that he would reach his home in time and get a rich breakfast.
(iii) What did he see suddenly in front of him?
Ans: Suddenly, he saw huge storm clouds in front of him. They look like a black mountain.
(iv) Pick out a word from the passage which means 'strong wind'.
Ans: 'Storm'.

4. "Inside the clouds,everything ............ I tried the radio". (9th Paragraph)
    "Paris Control? Paris Control? Can you hear me?" (10th Paragraph)
    "There was no answer ............ Lost in the storm". (11th Paragraph)
(i) What was it like inside the clouds?
Ans: Inside the clouds it was blackness and it was not possible to see anything outside the plane.
(ii) Was the plane flying smoothly?
Ans: No, the plane was jumping and twisting in the air.
(iii) Why could he not contact the Paris Control?
Ans: He could not contact the Paris Control room because the compass was not working and radio was dead.
(iv) Pick out a word from the passage which means 'turned'.
Ans: 'Twisted'.

5. "Then, in the black ............ one hand and waved." (11th Paragraph)
    "'Follow me', he was saying. 'Follow me'". (12th paragraph)
    "He knows that I ............ trying to help me." (13th Paragraph)
(i) What did he see in the black clouds?
Ans: He saw another aeroplane in the black clouds.
(ii) What was strange about the second plane?
Ans: The second aeroplane had no lights on its wings.
(iii) What did the pilot of the other plane indicate?
Ans: The pilot of the other plane waved and indicated the narrator to follow him.
(iv) What did the narrator think about the pilot of the other plane?
Ans: The narrator thought that the pilot of the other plane wanted to help him.

6. "He turned his aeroplane ............ like an obedient child." (14th Paragraph)
    "After half an hour ............ followed through the storm." (15th Paragraph)
(i) Why did he turn his aeroplane?
Ans: He turned his aeroplane slowly to the north so that the author might follow him easily.
(ii) How did the author behave?
Ans: The author behaved as an obedient child.
(iii) How much fuel was left in the plane?
Ans: There was only enough fuel to fly for five or ten minutes more.
(iv) Pick out a word from the passage which means the same as 'submissive'.
Ans: Obedient.

7. "Suddenly I came out ............ not see it anywhere." (16th Paragraph)
    "I landed and was ............ to say 'Thank you'." (17th Paragraph)
(i) What did the narrator see after coming out of the clouds?
Ans: After coming out of the clouds, the narrator saw two straight lines of lights which was a runway.
(ii) What is a runway?
Ans: A runway is a track of landing and taking off for aeroplane.
(iii) Why did he turn back?
Ans: He turned back to see his friend in the balck aeroplane who had guided him in landing safely.
(iv) Whom did he want to thank and why?
Ans: He wanted to thank the pilot of another plane who had helped him in landing safely.

**Very Short Answer (VSA) Questions:

1. Where was the speaker going and how?
Ans: The speaker was going to England and he was flying his old Dakota aeroplane.

2. What happened to his aeroplane?
Ans: His aeroplane twisted and jumped in the air.

3. What was the advice given to him from Paris Control?
Ans: Paris Control advised him to turn twelve degree west.

4. How did the clouds look?
Ans: The clouds looked like black mountains.

5. What was the trouble in flying to the North or South?
Ans: His Dakota aeroplane was having short fuel.

6. What was there inside the clouds?
Ans: Inside the clouds everyhting was black.

7. What had happened to other instruments?
Ans: Other instruments became dead.

8. How did his compass work?
Ans: His compass became dead.

9. What did the speaker see suddenly?
Ans: The speaker saw suddenly an another aeroplane in the black clouds.

10. How did the another pilot conduct?
Ans: The another pilot turned towards him and waved his hand.


**Short Answer (SA) Questions:

1. Describe the author's feeling while he was flying his aeroplane back to England?
Ans: The author was very excited while he was flying his aeroplane back to England because he wanted to spend his holiday with his family at home.

2. How much fuel was there in the aeroplane when the writer started flying?
Ans: There was sufficient fuel in the tanks of the aeroplane to reach England safely when the writer started flying.

3. What risk did the writer take while flying? Why?
Ans: The writer decided to risk to fly through the storm clouds because he wanted to enjoy his holiday with his family back in England.

4. What did the writer feel inside the clouds?
Ans: When the writer entered the clouds, it became impossible to see outside the aeroplane. The aeroplane jumped and twisted in the air and all the instruments like compass, etc stopped working due to the weather condition.

5. What did the writer see inside the black clouds?
Ans: The writer saw a black aeroplane which had no lights on its wings. The writer could see the face of the pilot in the black clouds who was waving and signalling him to follow to get out of the storm.

6. Why did the writer follow the pilot of another aeroplane?
Ans: The writer followed the pilot of another aeroplane because he had lost the way in the storm and was unable to see anything. The pilot of another aeroplane was helping him to get out of the storm and land safely.

7. Why did the women in control room get shocked when the writer asked about another aeroplane?
Ans: The women in control room was shocked when the writer asked about another aeroplane because there was no such plane flying in the sky that night as she saw on the radar.

8. Why did the writer want to meet the pilot of the black aeroplane?
Ans: The writer want to meet the pilot of the black aeroplane to thank him as he saved his life by helping him to come out from the storm.


**Long Answer (LA) Questions:

1. How did the writer get out of the storm in the night to land safely?
Ans: The writer was flying his old Dakota aeroplane when he saw the black clouds. He was lost in the storm. Suddenly, he saw a black aeroplane by his side, which had no lights on its wings.
        The pilot instructed the writer to follow as he had lost the way. He obeyed him like a child. He was very happy to follow him. After sometime the pilot of another plane started to land. The writer followed him blindly through the storm and came out of the clouds.
        He saw the lights of the runway and landed safely.

2. Why was the writer happy when he decided to fly in the night?
Ans: The writer was very happy when he decided to fly that night because he was going home to his family to enjoy his holiday. When he started, everything seem to be perfect. the sky was clear, no clouds could be seen. He was flying back to England in his old Dakota aeroplane over France. He was happy being alone in the sky and was dreaming of his holiday.

3. "The Black Aeroplane is a mystery story." Explain.
					OR
    Do you agree that the story "The Black Aeroplane" is a mystery? Justify your answer with reasons.
Ans: Yes, "The Black Aeroplane" is a mystery story. The pilot of old Dakota was caught in the storm. He was helpless as his instruments had stopped functioning. He did not know what to do. Suddenly, he saw a black aeroplane flying next to him. It was a strange plane flying in the storm without lights. The pilot of the black aeroplane helped him in landing safely. On landing he turned back to look for for the friend but he had disappeared. The black aeroplane had gone, the lady in control centre told him that he was the only one flying that night. There was no other plane. He could not understand who helped him. It was really a big mystery.

4. Define the values that reflect from the action of the pilot of old Dakota aeroplane when he wanted to thank the pilot of the Black Aeroplane.
					OR
    The pilot wanted to thank another pilot after his safe landing. Why? What values of the writer are reflected from his action?
Ans: The pilot of the old Dakota was caught in the storm. He lost his contact with the control room. In this troubling situation, his fuel tank was also empty. He lost all his hopes but suddenly a black strange plane appeared. The pilot of the black plane asked the writer to follow him. The writer landed safely. After his safe landing, he wanted to thank the pilot of black plane. This shows his gratitude towards the pilot of black plane. He was thankful to him for saving his life. It shows that the pilot of Dakota had a value of gratefulness in his character.