					AMANDA


**Read the stanza and answer the questions that follows:

1. Don't bite your nails, Amanda!
    Don't hunch your shoulders, Amanda!
    Stop that slunching and sit up straight,
    Amanda!
(i) Name the poem and poet.
Ans: This stanza has been extracted from the poem "Amanda" composed by Rabin Klein.
(ii) Who do you think could be the speaker in the stanza?
Ans: I think the speaker could be either mother or father.
(iii) What is the tone of the speaker towards Amanda?
Ans: The tone of the speaker towards Amanda is 'ragging' and 'scolding'.
(iv) Who is Amanda?
Ans: Amanda is a teenage girl.

2. (There is a languid, emarald sea,
    where the sole inhabitant is me --
    a mermaid, drifting blissfully.)
(i) Who is the speaker?
Ans: Amanda is the speaker.
(ii) What does the speaker wish?
Ans: Amanda wishes to have freedom from constant nagging.
(iii) Pick out the word from the stanza an antonym of 'enrerjetic'.
Ans: 'Languid'.

3. Did you finish your homework, Amanda?
    Did you tidy your room, Amanda?
    I thought I told you to clean your shoes,
   Amanda!
(i) Who speakes these lines and to whom?
Ans: These lines are spoken by Amanda's mother or father to Amanda.
(ii) What are the various works she has to do?
Ans: She has to complete homework, clean her room and her shoes.
(iii) What does the parent think she asked Amanda to do?
Ans: The parents think that she asked Amanda to clean her shoes.
(iv) Does Amanda like the advice of the speaker?
Ans: No, she does not like the constant nagging by her mother or father. She wants to live without any restrictions.

4. (I am an orphan, roaming the street.
    I pattern soft dust with my hushed, bare feet,
    The silence is golden, the freedom is sweet.)
(i) Who is referred to as an orphan in the first line?
Ans: Amanda is referred to as an orphan in the first line.
(ii) What does the speaker want to convey through this stanza?
Ans: She wants to roam in the street and make pattern on sanda with her feet.
(iii) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as 'wandering'.
Ans: 'Roaming'.

5. Don't eat that chocolate, Amanda!
    Remember your acne, Amanda!
    Will you please look at me when I'm speaking to you,
    Amanda!
(i) Who is the speaker in these lines?
Ans: Amanda's mother or father is the speaker of these lines.
(ii) What does the speaker advise Amanda?
Ans: The speaker advised Amanda not to eat chocolates. The speaker wants her to take care of her acne.
(iii) Which lines show that Amanda does not take interest in what the speaker says?
Ans: The line shows that she is not interested in what the speaker says.

6. (I am Rapunzel, I have not a care;
    life in a tower is tranquil and rare;
    I'll certainly never let down my bright hair!)
(i)  Who is the speaker in these lines?
Ans: Amanda is the speaker in these lines.
(ii) What does the speaker wish to do?
Ans: Amanda wants to be like Rapulzel who lived peacefully in the tower.
(iii) What does the stanza promise?
Ans: Amanda promised herself that she would never let down her bright hair.

7. Stop that sulking at once, Amanda!
    You're always so moody, Amanda!
    Anyone would think that I nagged at you,
    Amanda!
(i) Who is the speaker in the above stanza?
Ans: Amanda's mother or father is the speaker of the above stanza.
(ii) Who is being nagged and by whom in the above lines?
Ans: Amanda is being nagged by her mother or father.
(iii) Do you think Amanda is moody?
Ans: No, Amanda is not a moody girl. She is a normal girl who wants to get rid of constant nagging and wants to live a peaceful life.

**Long and Short Questions Answers:

1. What does the speaker ask Amanda not to do in the poem "Amanda"?
Ans: The poet advises Amanda not to bite her nails, not to hunch her shoulders and not to eat chocolates. She advises her to sit straight and take care of her acne. She further advises her to keep herself clean.

2. In which way does Amanda imagine herself to be mermaid?
Ans: Mermaid is believed to be a creature with a woman's head and body, and a fish's tail instead of legs. Amanda imagines herself or wishes to be free like a mermaid, which is moving slowly in a state of bliss in the sea, which is green like an emerald.

3. What instructions were given to Amanda about her homework, room or shoes?
Ans: Amanda had been commanded or advised to finish her homework and keep her room neat and clean. She is also instructed to clean her shoes.

4. How and why does Amanda say that she is an orphan?
Ans: Amanda seems to be fed up with continuous insturctions and naggings. She is feeling that her freedom is curtailed. So, she imagines herself to be an orphan street child who leaves imprints caused on the soft dust by her bare feet. She feels that silence is golden or precious and freedom is sweet.

5. What impression do you form about Amanda after reading the poem "Amanda"?
Ans: Amanda feels suffocated because she is controlled and instructed not to do one thing or the other. She feels that her freedom is curtailed. But Amanda wishes to be free to live in her own world. She is a very sensitive girl who indulges in daydreaming quiet often. She highly valued silence and freedom.

6. What type of life does Amanda wish for?
Ans: Amanda feels that her freedom has been curtailed. She is leading a controlled life under constant nagging. She wishes for a life free from all the restrictions. She wants to lead a life like a fairy, a mermaid or an orphan. Like a mermaid she wants to drift blissfully.

7. "I am an orphan, roaming the street"
Is Amanda an orphan? If not, why does she say so?
Ans: No, Amanda is not an orphan. There are many restrictions on her. She does not like this life. She wants freedom. She feels that there is no one to understand her feelings. She is all alone. This is the reason she says that she is an orphan.

8. "Don't eat that chocolate Amanda!
     Remember your acne, Amanda!"
    Why is Amanda forbidden to eat chocolate?
Ans: Amanda is a little child who wants freedom from all restrictions of life. She loves to eat chocolate but she is forbidden to eat them as these will affect her health adversely. She is advised to take care of her acne.

9. "Will you please look at me when I'm speaking to you,"
    Who do you think speaking to Amanda?
Ans: The poet is speaking to Amanda. She had put many restrictions on her. She advises her to take care of her health and acne. She is advised to follow a controlled and disciplined life.

10. "life in a tower is tranquil and rare;
       I'll certainly never let down my bright hair."
    Why does the poet say that life in a tower is tranquil and rare? Whose life is he talking about?
Ans: The poet feels that life in a tower is peaceful and full of freedom because there is no one to nag you. She is talking about Rapunzel who lives in a peaceful tower.

11. Why does Amanda imagine to be (i) a mermaid (ii) an orphan (iii) Rapunzel?
Ans: (i) Amanda imagines herself to be a mermaid so that she may drift in the silent sea and enjoy the loneliness and peace there. She yearns for freedom.
(ii) Amanda wishes to be an orphan so that she may play bare feet in the dust without receiving several instructions or scolding. She wishes for her independence and freedom.
(iii) Amanda is fascinated by the lonely and tranquil life of Rapunzel in a closed tower. She wishes for such a life so that her nagging mother may not reach there. Here also she yearns for her freedom from nagging.

12. "Don't bite you nails, Amanda!
       Don't hunch your shoulders, Amanda!
    Amanda's parents were over anxious about her. She often found their instructions very stifling. Reading the poem and based on Amanda's experience, write a paragraph on the topic "Should parents be allowed to control children?"
Ans: It goes without saying that no child can survive the early years of its life without the care and protection of its parents. But some parents are so over protective and over anxious about their children that they don't let their children live in peace. They don't allow them to explore and find out things on their own. Such parents kill the child's initiative in learning. These parents always boss around and irritate their children. They don't trust their child's capability to do things independently. However the parents may control the child and guide them as long as it is necessary. Equipped with knowledge and confidence they will be able to face the world boldly. Gradually the child should be allowed to grow on its own and be responsible for its actions. When parents give freedom to their children they gain confidence and learn to do things in a better way.

13. It is fact that every person including a young child has his/her own individuality and personality. It is not necessary that the child will see the world according to the direction of his/her parents. Based on the reading of the poem "Amanda", write a paragraph on "Should children be given freedom".
Ans: Growing up is a phrase which requires a lot of space. A single child in his teens would feel more claustrophobic than four kids in the same family. The reason being parents of a single child tend to be more protective and possessive. What they fail to understand is that without sufficient space to grow the child will only end up disliking his/her parents. Freedom is necessary in any relationship. A child should be allowed to choose his hobbies, to learn what he pleases, to play with kids of his age. In the present times, where nothing is safe and none can be trusted, parents are only dissuaded from sending their kids out to play. It is only through these activities can a child learn a socialize and understand values. Therefore, parents should give enough freedom for the child to grow but also make sure that the child is not led away by material needs.

14. Childhood blooms and bounces with the wind of innocence and fanciful fantasy. And kind of outside or forceful restriction is completely unbearable to a child. If he is nagged or scolded, he may feel alienated and withdrawn. But nagging is not a good option. In the context of the poem "Amanda", write a paragraph on "Effects of parental nagging".
Ans: Nagging is never a good option. Parents have a tendency to nag their children, especially regarding their studies. But nagging never helps. When a parent keeps on ranting to the child to study, the child will only grow averse to studying. It will create resentment between the child and the parent. After a while a point will be reached where the child will simply stop listening to the parent. It also makes the child feel controlled. Parents keep repeating what is to be done, how it is to be done, etc. over and over again, always supervising. This will create stress for the child and make him/her uncomfortable. Hence, parents should indulge in looking at the brighter side and praise their kids' accomplishments and avoid pointing out the weaknesses.

15. It is said that excess of everything is bad. Excess of parental love may make a child pampered, in the same way excess of nagging may throw a child into negativity. These statements are seen justified to some extent in the peom "Amanda". Explain.
Ans: None can refuse the precious role of parents or elders or teachers in the proper grooming and holistic development of a child. Parents personality resonates and reflects through the behaviours and personality of a child. Parents do every possible thing. They can do anything to shape the character and habits of their child. But sometimes in course of nurturing the kid, the parents cross the limit unknowingly. They became either over caring or over protective or over anxious. They forget the fact that when a matured mind cannot tolerate excess of do's and don'ts, how can they expect it from a child who is totally unware of the worries and cares of the world. To a child the world means a world of imaginating fancy and fairy. If being nagged repeatedly she may form negative opinion about her mother or father. The same thing we find in the poem "Amanda". Amanda is a girl of around 8-11 years of age who lives in her own fairy land. She does not appreciate the constant scolding and nagging of her mother or father. She feels that her freedom is puntuated. So, she instead of following the instructions, remains wandering in her own world of imagination. Excess of nagging has resulted into negativity as Amanda considers herself an orphan. She sulks. She avoids eye to eye contact. Hence parents must understand the line of boundary and act.
    
