						FIRE  AND  ICE


EXTRA QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS:

1. What are the two different views about the end of the world in the poem 'Fire and Ice'?
Ans: The two different views of people regarding the end of the world are -- Fire and Ice i.e., by desire and hatred.

2. What does the poet think about the end of the world?
Ans: The poet thinks about the end of the world that people think fire is the main cause of destruction. But by the end of the poem he says that both fire and ice are equally destructive. Both have the same power of causing destruction.

3. What do 'Fire' and 'Ice' symbolize in the poem 'Fire and Ice'?
Ans: 'Fire' and 'Ice' are symbolized here. 'Fire' stands for conflict, fury, intolerance, insensitivity while 'Ice' stands for greed, avarice, lust, rigidity, coldness, indifference, hatred etc.

4. How can fire destroy the world?
Ans: 'Fire' symbolizes passion. It will lead to conflict and ultimately result in the destruction of the world. Fire represents desire that is fervent, consuming, always wanting more.

5. What message does the poet wish toconvey through the poem 'Fire and Ice'?

				OR

What is the central idea of the poem 'Fire and Ice'?

Ans: The poet presents two possibilities about the ending of the world. It will be due to Fire and Ice. He prefers the first as he believes the world will end in fire but the ice will not go away.

6. Today's world is conflict ridden. People fight over various issues and there is no peace in the world. Explain based on your reading of the poem 'Fire and Ice'?
Ans: Hatred is a predominant issue in today's world. Neighbour hates his neighbour, brother hates his brother. None is willing to forgive each other or tolerate each other. As a result of the hatred we live in a fragmented world. If hatred continues to rule our lives and world, nothing will remain intact. All our achievements will perish and the world will come to an end. If we have to save the world we need to learn how to forget and forgive. For this we need to have enormous amount of love and compassion and be willing to tolerate the differences and learn to get along with each other.

7. What does 'Fire' and 'Ice' stand for and what is the general opinion regarding the world?
Ans: 'Fire' stands for fury, desire, lust, anger, avarice, cruelty, greed. 'Ice' is symbolic of hatred, coldness, rigidity, insensitivity and intolerance. The general opinion regarding the world is that the world will end in fire and some say in ice. Both the reasons contrast each other and one is equally opposite to each other. People who favour fire believe that it will be the heat and passion which will end the world. On the other side some people think that it will be the ice which will freeze the world.