				HOW  TO  TELL  WILD  ANIMALS


**Read the stanza and answer the questions that follows:

1. If ever you should go by chance
    To jungles in the east;
    And if there should to you advance
    A large and tawny beast,
    If he roars at you as you're dyin'
    You'll know it is the Asian Lion...
(i) Name the poem and the poet.
Ans: This stanza has been taken from the poem "How to Tell Wild Animals" composed by Carolyn Wells.
(ii) How does one identify the Asian Lion?
Ans: The Asian Lion is identified by its size, colour and roar, it is a large tawny beast.
(iii) How does an Asian Lion react on seeing a man?
Ans: When Asian Lion sees a man, it roars and takes no time in killing him.
(iv) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as "All of a sudden".
Ans: "By chance"

2. Or if some time when roaming round,
    A noble wild beast greets you,
    With black stripes on a yellow ground,
    Just notice if he eats you.
    This simple rule may help you learn
    The Bengal Tiger to discern.
(i) Who is the 'noble wild beast' here?
Ans: The 'noble wild beast' is Bengal Tiger here.
(ii) How does this beast look?
Ans: This beast looks like it is coloured with black stripes on a yellow ground.
(iii) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as 'to recognise'.
Ans: 'Discern'.

3. If strolling forth, a beast you view,
    Whose hide with spots is peppered,
    As soon as he was lept on you,
    You'll know it is the Leopard.
    'Twill do no good to roar with pain,
    He'll only lep and lep again.
(i) How can you recognise the Leopard?
Ans: The Leopard can be recognised by its spots on the skin.
(ii) How is it different from the Bengal Tiger?
Ans: Bengal Tiger has black stripes on a yellow ground while the Leopard has round black spots on the body.
(iii) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as - 'a large animal of the cat family'.
Ans: 'Leopard'.

4. If when you're walking round your yard
    You meet a creature there,
    Who hugs you very, very hard,
    Be sure it is a Bear.
    If you have any doubts, I guess
    He'll give you just one more caress.
(i) Whom can you meet in the yard?
Ans: In your yard, you can meet a bear.
(ii) How can one recognise that he is meeting a bear?
Ans: One can recognise that he is meeting a bear by its hard hug.
(iii) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as - 'loving touch' or 'gentle touch'.
Ans: 'Caress'.
(iv) How does it treat the Man?
Ans: When a bear meets a man, it hugs him very hard.

5. Though to distinguish beasts of prey
    A novice might nonplus,
    The Crocodile you always may
    Tell from the Hyena thus;
    Hyenas come with merry smiles;
    But if they weep they're Crocodiles.
(i) What can happen with a novice?
Ans: A novice can be confused to recognised the wild animals.
(ii) What is the difference between Crocodile and Hyena?
Ans: The difference between Crocodile and Hyena is that the Crocodiles weep while the Hyena smiles.
(iii) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as - 'Confused'.
Ans: 'Nonplus'.
(iv) Name the animals being described here.
Ans: Hyena and Crocodile are being described in the stanza.

6. The true Chameleon is small,
    A lizard sort of thing;
    He hasn't any ears at all,
    And not a single wing.
    If there is nothing on the tree,
    'Tis the Chameleon you see.
(i) Which animal has been described in the stanza?
Ans: The Chameleon has been described in this stanza.
(ii) How can it be identified?
Ans: If an animal does not have ears and wings, it is just like a lizard.
(iii) Pick out the word from the stanza that means the same as - 'a small reptile'.
Ans: 'Lizard'.
(iv) Where does this animal live?
Ans: The Chameleon can be seen on tree.

**Long and Short Questions Answers:

1. How can you identify the Asian Lion?
Ans: The poet in the humorous way says that if a person goes to the jungles in the east and if a large and brownish wild animal roars while killing him, the dying man can know that it is the Asian Lion.

2. How can you identify the Bengal Tiger?
Ans: A person can identify the Bengal Tiger when a beast with black stripes on yellow body meets and eats him. This is how he can make out that it is the Bengal Tiger.

3. How can a man know that the beast is Leopard?
		OR
    Describe some features of the Leopard.
Ans: Leopard has spots on its body. It is a dangerous and powerful animal. It has the quality of leaping again and again. It leaps over its prey at once. It eats its prey.

4. How does a poet tell us to identify a bear?
Ans: The poet says that if, while walking round the courtyard of his house, a person meets there a creature who hugs him very very hard, then he can be sure that it is a bear.

5. How does the poet distinguish the Hyena from Crocodile?
Ans: The poet tells us how to distinguish a Hyena from a Crocodile. A Hyena is an animal who can laugh. The poet says that if a creature greets a person while smiling merrily, then that creature is Hyena. If a creature sheds tears while swallowing its prey, then it is Crocodile.

6. What does the poet tell us about a chameleon?
Ans: The poet tells us that a chameleon is found on a tree. It is a creature which can change its colour according to its surrounding. It is very difficult to see a chameleon on the tree because it changes its colour according to the colour of the tree.

7. The poet has used some special qualities to describe the animals and create humour in the poem. Each of us also has some special qualities which make us quite different from others. Do you agree with this statement? Comment with reference to the poem "How to Tell Wild Animals".
Ans: The poet has used some selected words and expressions to describe the animals and to create humour. For example she says, "A noble beast greets you" for "The Bengal Tiger", Abear - hugs you", "Crocodiles weep" and "Hyena smiles". Like these animals, each of us has some special qualities which make us quite different from others. For example, we face many people in a day, but even then we can easily recognise them only through their voice or through their special qualities. These distinctive qualities give them a unique identification. This statement is absolutely right.

8. The poet uses humour in a perfect manner in her poem - "How to Tell Wild Animals" to bring smile on the face of readers. In our daily life also humour is the best medicines for every ailment. Do you agree? Comment.
					OR
    "Humour is the perfect medicine for all diseases". Discuss this statement by taking examples from the poem "How to Tell Wild Animals".
Ans: The poet talks about wild animals in a funny manner. All the dangerous, wild animals like lions, tigers, leopards, bears, hyenas, crocodiles, chameleons have been portrayed humorously. The poet describes their dangerous activities in such a manner that they produce laughter.
