

				NELSON  MANDELA  --  LONG  WALK  TO  FREEDOM

**Read the following passages and answer the questions that follow:

1. TENTH May dawned bright and clear. For the past few days I had been pleasantly beseiged by dignitaries and world leaders who were coming to pay their respects before the inauguration. The inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of international leaders on South African soil.
The ceremonies took place in the lovely sandstone amphitheatre formed by the Union Buildings in Pretoria. For decades this had been the seat of white supremacy, and now it was the site of a rainbow gathering of different colours and nations for the installation of South Africa's first democratic, non-racial government.
(i) Who is 'I' in the passage?
Ans: Nelson Mandela is 'I' in the passage.
(ii) Where did the ceremony take place?
Ans: The ceremony took place in an amphitheatre formed by the Union Buildings in Pretoria.
(iii) Why did the dignitaries and world leaders come there?
Ans: The dignitaries and world leaders came there to pay their respects to the first democratic non-racial government.
(iv) Where was the occasion?
Ans: The occasion was the inauguration ceremony of Nelson Mandela as South Africa's first Black President in the Union Building in Pretoria, South Africa.

2. On that lovely autumn day I was accompanied by my daughter Zenani. On the podium, Mr de Klerk was first sworn in as the second deputy president. Then Thabo Mbeki was sworn in as the first deputy president. When it was my turn, I pledged to obey and uphold the Constitution and to devote myself to the well-being of the Republic and its people. To the assembled guests and the watching world, I said: Today, all of us do, by our presence here... confer glory and hope to newborn liberty. Out of the experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long, must be born a society of which all humanity will be proud.
(i) Who is Zenani?
Ans: Zenani is the daughter of Nelson Mandela.
(ii) Who was sworn in as the first deputy president?
Ans: Thabo Mbeki was sworn in as the first deputy president of South Africa.
(iii) Who was sworn in as the second deputy president?
Ans: Mr de Klerk was sworn in as the second deputy president of South Africa.
(iv) What was the pledge taken by 'I'?
Ans: Nelson Mandela pledged to obey and uphold the Constitution. He pledged to serve the people of his country.

3. 'We, who were outlaws not so long ago, have today been given the rare privilege to be the host to the nations of the world on our own soil. We thank all of our distinguished international guests for having come to take possession with the people of our country of what is, after all, a common victory for justice, for peace, for human dignity.
We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation. We pledge ourselves to liberate all our people from the continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation, suffering, gender and other discrimination.
Never, never, and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another.
The sun shall never set on so glorious a human achievement.
Let freedom reign, God bless Africa!
(i) Who does 'we' refer in the first line of the passage?
Ans: 'We' refer to the people of South Africa in the first line of the passage.
(ii) What is the privilege that has been explained here?
Ans: South Africa has been given the rare privilege to be the host to the nations of the world.
(iii) What did the people of South Africa achieve at last?
Ans: The people of South Africa achieved their political emancipation.
(iv) The word 'bondage' means ____ in the passage.
Ans: The word 'bondage' means slavery in the passage.

4. A few moments later we all lifted our eyes in awe as a spectacular array of South African jets, helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect formation over the Union Buildings. It was not only a display of pinpoint precision and military force, but a demonstration of the military's loyalty to democracy, to a new government that had been freely and fairly elected. Only moments before, the highest generals of the South African defence force and police, their chests bedecked with ribbons and medals from days gone by, saluted me and pledged their loyalty. I was not unmindful of the fact that not so many years before they would not have saluted but arrested me. Finally a chevron of Impala jets left a smoke trail of the black, red, green, blue and gold of the new South African Flag.
(i) What did they see over the Union Buildings?
Ans: They saw a spectacular show by South African jets, helicopters, the troop carriers over the Union Buildings.
(ii) What was the occasion?
Ans: It was the occasion of installation of the newly elected democratic government in South Africa.
(iii) What did this symbolise?
Ans: The show by the military forces symbolised their loyalty towards the newly elected democratic government in South Africa.
(iv) What was Mandela not unmindful of?
Ans: Nelson Mandela was not unmindful of the fact that the same army officers who had saluted him, would not have done so many years before. They would have rather arrested him.

5. The day was symbolised for me by the playing of our two national anthems, and the vision of while singing 'Nkosi Sikelel - iAfrika' and the blacks singing 'Die Stem', the old anthem of the Republic. Although that day neither group knew the lyrics of the anthem they once despised, they would soon know the words by heart.
On the day of the inauguration, I was overwhelmed with a sense of history. In the first decade of the twentieth century, a few years after the bitter Anglo-Boer war and before my own birth, the white skinned people of South Africa patched up their differences and erected a system of racial domination against the dark-skinned people of their own land.
(i) How was the day symbolised?
Ans: The day was symbolised by the playing of their two national anthems -- 'Nkosi Sikelel - iAfrika' and 'Die Stem'.
(ii) What was the national anthem for the blacks?
Ans: The national anthem for the blacks was 'Die Stem'.
(iii) What was specific about that system?
Ans: The system had formed the basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane, societies the world was ever known.
(iv) How was the new system different?
Ans: The new system recognised the rights and freedom of all people regardless of the colour of their skin.

6. The structure they created formed the basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane, societies the world was ever known. Now, in the last decade of the twentieth century, and my own eight decade as a man, that system had been overturned forever and replaced by one that recognised the rights and freedoms of all peoples, regardless of the colour of their skin.
That day had come about through the unimaginable sacrifices of thousands of my people, people whose suffering and courage can never be counted or repaid. I felt that day, as I have on so many other days, that I was simply the sum of all those African patriots who had gone before me. That long and noble line ended and now began again with me. I was pained that I was not able to thank them and that they were not able to see what their sacrifices had brought.
(i) What type of structure had they created?
Ans: They had created such structure that formed the basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane, societies the world was ever known.
(ii) What did they talk about the people?
Ans: They talked about the rights and freedoms of people in the last decade of the twentieth century.
(iii) Why did 'he' remember the African patriots?
Ans: Nelson Mandela remembered the African patriots for sacrificing their lives for this cause. He said that their contribution can never be repaid.
(iv) Why was he pained?
Ans: He was pained as the people who laid their lives for this day could not be present to see what their sacrifices had achieved for the country and its people.

7. The policy of apartheid created a deep and lasting wound in my country and my people. All of us will spend many years, if not generations, recovering from that profound hurt. But the decades of oppression and brutality had another, unintended, effect, and that was that it produced the Oliver Tambos, the Walter Sisulus, the Chief Luthulis, the Yusuf Dadoos, The Bram Fischers, the Robert Sobukwes of our time - men of such extraordinary courage, wisdom and generosity that their like may never be know again. Perhaps it requires such depths of oppression to create such heights of character. My country is rich in the minerals and gems that lie beneath its soil, but I have always known that its greatest wealth is its people, finer and truer than the purest diamonds.
(i) What did the policy of apartheid create?
Ans: The policy of apartheid created a deep and lasting wound in the country and its people.
(ii) What is the greatest wealth of the narrator's country?
Ans: The greatest wealth of the narrator's country is its courageous people.
(iii) What was the unintended effect of this policy?
Ans: The unintended effect of that policy was that it created many men of courage, wisdom and generosity.
(iv) Name some of the men of extraordinary courage.
Ans: the Oliver Tambos, the Walter Sisulus, the Chief Luthulis, the Yusuf Dadoos, The Bram Fischers, the Robert Sobukwes.

8. In life of every man has twin obligations -- obligations to his family, to his parents, to his wife and children; and he has an obligation to his people, his community, his country. In a civil and humane society, each man is able to fulfil those obligations according to his own inclinations and abilities. But in a country like South Africa, it was almost impossible for a man of my birth and colour to fulfil both those obligations. In South Africa, a man of colour who attempted to live as a human being was punished and isolated. In South Africa, a man who tried to fulfil his duty to his people was inevitably ripped from his family and his home and was forced to live a life apart, a twilight existence of secrecy and rebellion. I did not in the beginning choose to place my people above my family, but in attempting to serve my people, I found that I was prevented from fulfilling my obligations as a son, a brother, a father and a husband.
(i) What are the obligations that every man has in life?
Ans: Every man has two obligations -- one is to his family and second is to his community and to his country.
(ii) Why was it impossible for a coloured man to fulfil his obligations?
Ans: In South Africa, if a coloured man tried to fulfil his obligations, he was punished and isolated.
(iii) How were the people who tried to fulfil the obligations, treated in South Africa?
Ans: Those who tried to fulfil these obligations were inevitably ripped from their families and his home and were forced to live a life of isolation and rebellion.
(iv) What is required to fulfil these obligations?
Ans: A civil and humane society is needed to fulfil these obligations.

9. I was not born with a hunger to be free. I was born free -- free in every way that I could know. Free to run in the fields near my mother's hut, free to swim in the clear stream that ran through my village, free to roast mealies under the stars and ride the board backs of slow-moving bulls. As long as I obeyed my father and abided by the customs of my tribe, I was not troubled by the laws of man or God.
It was only when I began to learn that my boyhood freedom was an illusion, when I discovered as a young man that my freedom had already been taken from me, then I began to hunger for it. At first, as a student, I wanted freedom only for myself, the transitory freedoms of being able to stay out at night, read what I pleased and go where I chose. Later, as a young man in Johannesburg, I yearned for the basis and honourable freedoms of achieving my potential, of earning my keep, of marrying and having a family -- the freedom not to be obstructed in a lawful life.
(i) In what ways was Mandela free?
Ans: Mandela was free to run in the fields, free to swim in the clear stream, free to roast mealies and ride the board backs of slow-moving bulls.
(ii) What kind of freedom did Mandela yearn for as a man?
Ans: Mandela yearned for the basic and honourable freedom of achieving his potential of earning his life.
(iii) What did he want as a student?
Ans: He wanted, as a student, freedom for himself, the freedom of being able to stay out at night, read what he wanted and go out where he chose.
(iv) What did he learn?
Ans: He learnt that his boyhood freedom was an illusion.

10. But then I slowly saw that not only was I not free, but my brothers and sisters were not free. I saw that it was not just my freedom that was curtailed, but the freedom of everyone who looked like I did. That is when i joined the African National Congress, and that is when the hunger for my own freedom became the greater hunger for the freedom of my people. It was this desire for the freedom of my people to live their lives with dignity and self respect that animated my life, that transformed a frightened young man into a bold one, that drove a law-abiding attorney to become a criminal, that truned a family-loving husband into a man without a home, that forced a life-loving man to live like a monk. I am no more virtuous or self-sacrificing than the next man, but I found that I couldn't even enjoy the poor and limited freedoms I was allowed when I knew my people were not free. Freedom is indivisible; the chains of anyone of my people were the chains on all of them, the chains on all of my people were the chains on me.
(i) Why did Mandela join the African National Congress?
Ans: Mandela joined the African National Congress because he wanted to fight for the freedom of his people.
(ii) What did Mandela realise?
Ans: Mandela realised that it was not only he and his family but the whole black community who were denied freedom in their own country.
(iii) What transformed him into a new different human being?
Ans: His desire for the freedom of his people to live their lives with dignity and self-respect changed him into a new human being.
(iv) Why could he not enjoy the freedom he had?
Ans: He could not enjoy the freedom because he knew that his people were not free.

11. I knew that the oppressor must be liberated just as surely as the oppressed. A man who takes away another man's freedom is a prisoner of hatred; he is locked behind the bars of prejidice and narrow-mindedness. I am not truly free if I am taking away someone else's freedom just as surely as I am not free when my freedom is taken from me. The oppressed and the oppressor alike are robbed of their humanity.
(i) What are the two enemies of a person?
Ans: Prejudice and narrow-mindedness are the two enemies of a person.
(ii) Who is a prisoner of hatred?
Ans: A man who takes away another man's freedom is a prisoner of hatred.
(iii) Who, according to the narrator, should be liberated?
Ans: According to the narrator both the oppressor and the oppressed should be liberated.
(iv) Pickout words from the passage that means the same as
(a) strong dislike	(b) The power or right to act, speak
Ans: (a) prejudice	(b) Freedom


**Very Short Answer Questions (VSA):

1. What was the occasion?
Ans: It was the occasion of installation of South Africa's first democratic government.

2. Where did the ceremony take place?
Ans: The ceremony took place in an amphitheatre formed by the Union Buildings in Pretoria.

3. Why had world leaders come there?
Ans: The world leaders had come there to pay their respect to the newly formed government.

4. Who was Zenani?
Ans: Zenani is the daughter of Nelson Mandela.

5. Who was sworn in as the first deputy president?
Ans: Thabo Mbeki was sworn in as the first deputy president of South Africa.

6. What was specific about that system?
Ans: The system was formed on the basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane societies the world has ever known.

7. When was the system eradicated?
Ans: The system was overturned in the last decade of the twentieth century.

8. How was the new system different?
Ans: The new system recognised the rights and freedom of all people regardless of the colour of their skin.

9. What did Mandela want as a student?
Ans: Mandela wanted freedom for himself as a student.

10. What did Mandela realise?
Ans: Mandela realised that there was no freedom in South Africa for anyone who looked like him.

11. What was Mandela not unmindful of?
Ans: Mandela was not unmindful of 'Apartheid'.

12. Why was Mandela pained?
Ans: Mandela was pained as the people who laid their lives for this day could not be present to see.

13. What did he think about freedom?
Ans: He thought that freedom was indivisible.

14. Why did he joined African National Congress?
Ans: He joined African National Congress to achieve freedom for all his people.

15. What are two enemies of a person?
Ans: Prejudice and narrow-mindedness are the two enemies of a person.

16. What does courage mean to Mandela?
Ans: Courage means to Mandela the triumph over fear.

17. What was the national anthem for the blacks?
Ans: The national anthem for the blacks was 'Die stem'.

18. Who accompanied Mandela?
Ans: Mandela's daughter Zenani accompanied Mandela.

19. What must the people learn?
Ans: The people must learn to hate. If they can learn to hate, they can be taught to love.

20. Who was sworn in as the second deputy president?
Ans: Mr de Klerk was sworn in as the second deputy president of South Africa.

21. What is 'Apartheid'?
Ans: 'Apartheid' is a political system that separates people on the basis of their race.

22. Who wrote the autobiography, "Long Walk to Freedom"?
Ans: Nelson Mandela wrote the autobiography, "Long Walk to Freedom"

23. What is the full name of Mr. Mandela?
Ans: The full name of Mr. Mandela is Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.

24. Why did the leaders gather in South Africa on 10 May, 1994?
Ans: The leaders gather in South Africa on 10 May, 1994 to pay their respects to the first democratic non-racial government.

25. What roared in perfect formation over the Union Buildings?
Ans: South African jets, helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect formation over the Union Buildings.

26. What could the highest generals have done to the author earlier?
Ans: The highest generals could have arrested the author earlier.

27. What were the colours emitted by a chevron of Impala jets?
Ans: The colours emitted by a chevron of Impala jets were black, red, green, blue and gold.

28. What did the smoke trail of impala jets symbolise?
Ans: The smoke trail of impala jets symbolised South African flag.

29. How old was the author at the time of the 'Inauguration'?
Ans: The author was in his eighties at the time of the inauguration.

30. How many years did Nelson Mandela spend in prison?
Ans: Nelson Mandela spent twenty seven years in prison.



**Short Answer Questions (SA):

1. What ideals did Mandela set out for the future of South Africa in his speech?
Ans: Mandela set out for the future of South Africa in his speech because he had deep feelings for his country and countrymen. He pledged to liberate all the people from poverty, deprivation and discrimination.

2. How according to Mandela, had apartheid policy affected South Africa?
Ans: Apartheid policy had affected South Africadeeply. It had created a deep and lasting wound in the country and its people. It will take a long time to heal this wound.

3. What did Mandela think about the oppressor and the oppressed?
Ans:Mandela thought about the oppressor and the oppressed that both are robbed equally. A man who takes away another man's freedom is a prisoner of hatred. In the same way, if his freedom is taken away, they both are without freedom. So both of them must be liberated.

4. What according to Mandela, is 'true-freedom'?
Ans: According to Mandela, true freedom means freedom not to be obstructed in leading a lawful life.

5. How did 'hunger for freedom' change Mandela's life?
Ans: In the beginning of his life, Mandela was not aware about freedom. Later Mandela found that his freedom had been taken away from him. As a student, he wanted freedom only for himself but slowly his own freedom became the greater hunger for the freedom of his people. This changed him completely.

6. What are the 'twin obligations' referred to by Nelson Mandela?
Ans: According to Nelson Mandela, every man has two obligations in life. The first obligation is to his family, to his parents, wife and children. Secondly, he has an obligation to his country, people and community.

7. Could a man, according to Mandela, fulfil these twin obligations in a country like South Africa?
Ans: No, these twin obligations could not be fulfilled by a man., in a country like South Africa, according to Mandela. It was because a man dark colour who attempted just to live as a human being was punished and isolated in the country.

8. What is the meaning of courage to Mandela?
Ans: According to Mandela, courage was not the absence of fear, but triumph over it. The brave man is not he who does not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear. Mandela learned the true meaning of courage from his comrades in the struggle.

9. What was unique in the inauguration ceremony?
Ans: The inauguration ceremony took place in the amphitheatreformed by the Union Buildingsin Pretoria. For decades, this had been the seat of white supremacy. Now it was the oath taking ceremony day for South Africa's first democratic, non-racial government. It was really a unique occasion.

10. Describe the inauguration ceremony in simple words.
Ans: It was the day of 10th May, 1994. The first democratic, non-racial government was to be installed. Dignitaries from different countries participated in the ceremony. South African men, women and children of all races were present there.

11. What promises did Mandela make to his people in the oath-taking speech?
Ans: In the oath-taking speech, Mandela promised that the country shall not again experience the oppression of one by another.

12. What did Mandela say about the future of the country in his speech?
Ans: In his speech, Nelson Mandela said, "I see a bright future of the country. Now no one will experience the oppression by another. It will make much progress. All people shall be free to do what they like."

13. How did South African jets, helicoptres and troops demonstrate?
Ans: It was a very special day for all. South African jets, helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect formation. They flew over the Union Buildings. It was a show of military's loyalty to the country and its democracy.

14. What did the generals and police officers do on that day?
Ans: The generals and police officers were also there. They were in their uniform. They had ribbons and medals on their chests. They saluted Mandela with great respect. Mandela was the first black president of South Africa. Although, many years ago, they might have arrested him.

15. Describe Mandela's life journey from a prisoner to the first black President of South Africa.
Ans: Nelson Mandela did alife-long struggle against the racial discrimination in South Africa. He had to pass many years of his life as a prisoner in the jail. At last the first democratic elections were held in South Africa. His party won 252 seats out of 400 and he became the first black President of South Africa.

16. What is the greatest wealth of a nation in Mandela's opinion?
Ans: In Mandela's opinion, the greatest wealth of a nation is not minerals and gems but its good and honest people.

17. What difficulties did Mandela face in his life?
Ans: Mandela had to face many difficulties in his life. He had to leave his house to fulfil his duty to his people. In the prison, he was treated very badly.

18. Who took oath first in the ceremony?
Ans: In  the ceremony, Mr de Klerk was first sworn in as second Deputy President.


**Long Answer Questions (LA):

1. Discuss the scene of the inauguration ceremony? Who took oath in the ceremony? Why is the inauguration called a historic occasion for South Africa?
Ans: It was the bright and clear day of 10th May, 1994. The inauguration ceremony took place in the Union Buildings amphitheatre in Pretoria. The most famous world leaders and representatives gathered there. The generals and police officers were also there. They had medals and ribbons on their chests. South African jets, helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect formation over the Union Buildings. First of all Mr de Klerk, then Thabo Mbeki and then Nelson Mandela took oath.
The inauguration can be called a historic occasion for South Africa as on this day the first democratic government was installed. It was an end of more than three centuries of the white rule. Nelson Mandela became the first Black President of South Africa.

2. What were Mandela's opinions about the first and last decades of the twentieth century? Why does he say on the day of the inauguration that he was overwhelmed with a sense of history?
Ans: On the day of the inauguration, the speaker's mind went back to history. He remembered the first decade, when the whites ruled over South Africa and they made a discrimination against the blacks. They built a system of racial discrimination against the blacks. Their behaviour was full of cruelty. They meted out inhuman treatment to the blacks. But now in the last decade of this century, this cruel system was overturned. Now a new system replaced it. It was the first democratic government of South Africa. Now there will be no discrimination the basis of colour.
That is why, on the day of the inauguration, he was overwhelmed with a sense of history.

3. What does Mandela think about the patriots? Can they be repaid?
Ans: Nelson Mandela thinks that the freedom and democratic government have all come only due to the great sacrifices of thousands of patriots. They were those men who did not care about their lives and died for their people and country. They can't be repaid. He thinks himself the sum of all those who had sacrified their lives. Now he regrets that he was not able to thank them. According to Mandela, the policy of apartheid greatly wounded the people. It was hard to recover. It would take much time.
These great patriots were Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulus, Luthuli, Dadoo, Fischer, Sobukwe etc.

4. What ideas does Mandela have about courage, love and hate?
Ans: According to Mandela, he learnt the meaning of courage from his comrades. They struggled very hard for the freedom of the country. They did not care for their lives. They sacrificed everything for their people and country. They did not break before the brutality of the oppressors. They showed their full strength. So Mandela learned courage from them. To him, courage means not the absence of fear but the victory over it. The brave man is one who conquers fear. No man is born hating another man due to colour or religion. Loves comes more naturally to the human heart than hate.
According to Mandela, both the oppressor and the oppressed are the prisoners of hatred. No one can become happy after taking away other's freedom.

5. What ideas did we get about freedom, the oppressor and the oppressed from this lesson? How did Nelson Mandela get hunger for freedom?
Ans: According to Mndela, both the oppressor and the oppressed need freedom. Not only the oppressed is without freedom, but also the oppressor. He is the prisoner of hatred, only his level of thinking encourages him to snatch others freedom. It is all due to his narrow mindedness. It is an obvious idea that the oppressed has no freedom. Nelson Mandela had hunger for freedom, when he knew that his freedom had been snatched. His idea for freedom was an illusion. He saw that his brothers and sisters were without freedom. His hunger for freedom encouraged him to join the African National Congress.

6. What differences came in Mandela's opinion about the meaning of freedom, when he saw a little boy and when he became young?
Ans: There were many differences in Mandela's opinion about the meaning of freedom, when he was a little boy and when he became young. While he was a little boy, the meaning of freedom was to run in the fields and to swim in the streams.
When he became young, he realised that his freedom was an illusion. Now he had realised that not only his freedom, but also others freedom had been seized. So he felt a hunger for freedom now. He wanted that all the people of his country should live with self-respect. They must do what they liked.

7. What are two obligations that Mandela described in this lesson? What was the reason that he was not able to fulfil those obligations?
Ans: In the lesson, Mandela described two obligations that everyone had to perform.
One obligation is for the family, children and wife and second obligation is for the country and community. But due to apartheid policy in South Africa, Mandela was not able to fulfil his obligation. Although men could fulfil these obligations according to their capacities and abilities. But in South Africa it was impossible for the blacks. When Mandela tried to fulfil them for his family, he was cut off from his family. He was forced to live the life of separation. When he tried to serve his country, he was put into prison. Thus, Mandela was not able to fulfil his obligations.

8. Nelson Mandela was the hero of South Africa's freedom movement. Comment.
Ans: Nelson Mandela was a true hero of South Africa's freedom movement. His conscience encouraged him to demand a respectful and uniquelife for all. His soul cleared him about the twin obligationsfor everyone. He was always determined to fulfil them. He performed his obligations for his family as well as for his community. Although he was prevented from doing so, yet he did not stop and got discouraged. He became homeless. Inspite of all these difficulties he could not chenge his decision.
He had a soul power to challenge the racial system of the white. He did not care the apartheid policy and announced that this policy had created a lasting wound in the country. He fought against it.
At last he got success. He became the first Black President of South Africa.

9. India is a country of unity in diversity. Can you explain any type of discrimination in India, on the basis of colour or creed?
Ans: India is a very wide country. In spite of that India is a country of unity in diversity. There are different religions in it. We can find different dresses, life style and food habits in India. Even then, they all have a pride to be an Indian.
India has a democratic form of government and there is no place for discriminationin this country. But there is some sort of discrimination on the basis of caste or creed. Here people are known by their caste and creed. They have no right to marry freely. Even today caste system has not gone out completely from our mind.
But it is good for all Indians that our Constitution has given equality to all. There is no place for discrimination in Indian Constitution.

10. India is a country of unity in diversity -- there are different languages, traditions, dresses, castes and cultures. Do you find any sort of discrimination in India?
Ans: India is a very big country. It has different languages, traditions, dresses, castes and cultures. Even then India has a unity in diversity. Its Constitution gives equality to every citizen. There is no place for colour prejudice in it. In India everyone has a right to get education to appear in competitions and to live at any place. There is no discrimination among Indians on the basis of caste, creed and colour. Indians can live in any state and they can marry in any caste. There is no colour discrimination in India.

11. Nelson Mandela described 'twin obligations' for a man. Do you agree with these obligations? Do you think that every person should fulfil these obligations in real life?
Ans: In this lesson, Nelson Mandela described two obligations for a man. These two obligations are -- one for the family and second is for the country. He said that one of the obligations is to work for his family. The other obligation is to his people, his community and his country.
We must agree with these obligations. In fact, we take care of families heartily and never think about country. If we don't care about our country, it will never prosper. So in my opinion, we must fulfil both these obligations in our real life.

12. "I was not born with a hunger to be free." What was the result of his hunger for freedom?
Ans: When Nelson Mandela was a young boy, he didn't know anything about freedom. His hunger for freedom began when he saw his people being punished under the policy of apartheid. It was clear to him that his boyhood freedom was just an illusion. Then he had come to know that he and his countrymen had no freedom. They couldn't say anything freely. Now Mandela's hunger for freedom had increased. Although, as a student, he wanted freedom only for himself but after growing up, he started to think maturely about the freedom. He saw that in South Africa everybody's freedom was curtailed. Thus the result of his hunger for freedom was the freedom of the country.

13. What does courage mean to Mandela? How did he learn the meaning of courage? What do you get about courage, love and hate from this chapter?
Ans: In this chapter, Nelson Mandela says that he learnt the meaning of courage from the comrades. They were freedom fighters. They did not care about their lives. He had seen those people who had sacrificed their lives for the country.
He learnt that courage was not absence of fear, But triumph over it. In other words, the brave man is one who conquers fear.
In Mandela's opinion, no man is born to hate another man on the basis of skin, colour or religion. Love comes more naturally to the human heart than from its opposite. Both the oppressor and the oppressed are the prisoners of hatred. They take away each other's freedom.