					THE  BALL  POEM


**Read the stanza and answer the questions that follows:

1. What is the boy now, who has lost his ball,
    What, what is he to do? I saw it go
    Merrily bouncing, down the street, and then
    Merrily over - there it is in the water!
(i) Name the poem and poet.
Ans: The stanza has been extracted from the poem "The Ball Poem" by John Berryman.
(ii) What has the boy lost?
Ans: The boy has lost his ball while playing.
(iii) What did he see?
Ans: He saw the ball going down the street.
(iv) Where did the ball go?
Ans: The ball went into the water.

2. No use to say 'O there are other balls':
    An ultimate shaking grief fixes the boy
    As he stands rigid, trembling, staring down
    All his young days into the harbour where
    His ball went.
(i) What does 'O there are other balls' imply?
Ans: It implies that the lass of his ball cannot console the boy even if he gets another ball.
(ii) Why is the child upset?
Ans: The child is upset because he has lost his ball.
(iii) What is he looking at?
Ans: He is looking at the place where his ball went.

3. I would not intrude on him;
    A dime, another ball, is worthless. Now
    He senses first responsibility
    In a world of possessions.
(i) What did the poet decide?
Ans: The poet decided not to interfere and suggest anything to the boy.
(ii) What does the boy understand?
Ans: The boy senses his first responsibility.
(iii) What does the 'world of possessions' refer to?
Ans: It refers to the world where a man is known by his possessions and is continually led by his decision to possess.

4. People will take
    Balls, balls will be lost always, little boy.
    And no one buys a ball back. Money is external.
    He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes,
    The epistemology of loss, how to stand up
    Knowing what every man must one day know
    And most know many days, how to stand up.
(i) What does the boy learn?
Ans: The boy is learning the epistemology of loss. He learns how to cope up with the loss.
(ii) What does he think about money?
Ans: He thinks about money that money is external.
(iii) Why was the boy upset?
Ans: The boy was upset because he had lost his ball.

**Long and Short Questions Answers:

1. How was the boy's ball lost?
Ans: The boy was playing with his ball. The ball bounced and it went down the street. From the street the ball fell into the water. This is how the boy lost his ball.

2. How did the boy react after losing his ball?
Ans: The boy was very much upset after losing the ball. He was filled with sadness, which affected him greatly. Stunningly he stood in a stiff manner, overpowered with grief, trembling and staring down where his ball was lost.

3. How does the boy 'senses first responsibility'?
Ans: The boy loses his ball and gets upset. This was his first lesson in sensing his first responsibility. He has the experience of losing something and learning how to cope up with the loss. He understands the nature of loss or what it means to lose something. He now will be more responsible and vigilant to avoid losing something in future.

4. What do you think the poetmeans by the following lines?
People will take balls,
balls will be lost always, little boy.
And no one buys a ball back.
Ans: I think the poet, in these lines, conveys a great message. Losing ball here symbolises miseries arising out of the lossses one suffers in life. In this materialistic world, there is cut throat competition. So losses are bound to happen some day or the other. We have to make up for our own losses. Nobody else will do it.

5. Why is it important for everyone to experience loss to stand up after it?
Ans: The poet believes that nothing is eternal. Everyone must experience the loss to help him bear it. It also teaches him how to recover from it and stand up. It will remind him to protect and preserve his possessions.

6. Why does the poet say that 'Money is external'?
Ans: The poet believes that money cannot buy each and everything. It can bring just external happiness by buying us possessions but it cannot make a boy recover from his unhappiness due to loss of a loved one or valued thing.

7. What does the poet mean by 'epistemology of loss' for the boy?
			OR
    How important is the learning of 'epistemology of loss' for the boy?
Ans: According to the poet, the epitemology of loss is the greatest lesson, the boy is learning. It teaches him to value and preserve his cherished things. It also teaches him to recover from the loss and move on with his life. When we try to understand what it means to lose something, we are more vigilant to check the further losses. Thus it helps us to be self-reliant and stand up on our own feet.

8. What does the poet say about 'a world of possessions'?
		OR
    What does the poet call the world 'a world of possessions'?
Ans: The poet calls the world 'a world of possessions' because the man values and is valued on the basis of his worldly possessions. All his feelings and his whole life are dominated by his possessions.

9. Why is it important for everyonr to experience loss and to stand up after it?
					OR
    There's always loss and there's is always disappointment. When someone is learning from loss, he is moving towards achievement. Elaborate.
					OR
    It's often been said that you learn more from losing than you do from winning. You learn a lot from a loss. It really gets your attention and it really motivates. Describe.
					OR
    Loss is and essential and significant experience of one's life. Explain.
Ans: Everyone experiences a loss at some point in one's life. It might be the loss of a beloved, or a parent or a close relative or even a pet. Human have a tendency of getting attached to things and the loss of things or people close to heart causes grievance. But one must not let that pull us down. Loss is and essential and significant experience of one's life. And one must learn to deal with it and move on. If we keep thinking about it or grieve over that loss, we can never come out of it. It will only affect uspsychologically and can have severe consequences. Brooding over a loss will never help in bringing things back to normal. Loss is inevitable sometimes. Once a loss occurs, one must grieve, but only for a short while. Thereafter one must get over it and move on in life.

10. Write the central idea of the poem "The Ball Poem".
Ans: The poet John Berryman "The Ball Poem" describes the grief of a boy over the loss of his ball. This loss makes him realise his first responsibility. The poet wants us to understand that in this materialistic world nothing is permanent. We will be forced to give up things which we love and even in time of problems, we have to learn to stand up. We have to learn to accept fate of our life.